This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

1

Rejuvenating IRS: AoI-based Low Overhead
Reconfiguration Design
Jorge Torres Gómez∗, Joana Angjo∗, Moritz Garkisch†, Vahid Jamali‡, Robert Schober†, and Falko Dressler∗
∗School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, TU Berlin, Berlin, Germany
†Institute for Digital Communications, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany
‡Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany

Abstract—Intelligent reflective surface (IRS) technologies help
mitigate undesirable effects in wireless links by steering the
communication signal between transmitters and receivers. IRS
elements are configured to adjust the phase of the reflected signal
for a user’s location and enhance the perceived signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR). In this way, an IRS improves the communication link
but inevitably introduces more communication overhead. This
occurs especially in mobile scenarios, where the user’s position
must be frequently estimated to re-adjust the IRS elements
periodically. Such an operation requires balancing the amount of
training versus the data time slots to optimize the communication
performance in the link. Aiming to study this balance with the
age of information (AoI) framework, we address the question of
how often an IRS needs to be updated with the lowest possible
overhead and the maximum of freshness of information. We
derive the corresponding analytical solution for a mobile scenario,
where the transmitter is static and the mobile user (MU) follows
a random waypoint mobility model. We provide a closed-form
expression for the average peak age of information (PAoI), as a
metric to evaluate the impact of the IRS update frequency. As
for the performance evaluation, we consider a realistic scenario
following the IEEE 802.11ad standard, targeting the mmWave
band. Our results reveal that the minimum achievable average
PAoI is in the microsecond range and the optimal IRS update
period is in the seconds range, causing 9 % overhead in the link
when the MU moves at a velocity of 1 m/s.

Index Terms—Age of information, intelligent reflecting surfaces,

mobility, mmWave, WiFi.

I. INTRODUCTION

R EALIZING intelligent reflective surface (IRS)-assisted

communication links are considered a powerful paradigm
to enhance next-generation wireless communication. IRSs
allow reshaping the communication channel for improved
quality of service (QoS) through low-cost reflective patches
organized as planar arrays [1]. This technology enables the
steering of communication signals by adjusting the phase
introduced by the IRS elements, enhancing signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) levels in targeted regions. Such a solution finds
application in mmWave band networks, at scalable cost and
power consumption levels [2].

A key aspect of ensuring a given SNR is the use of low-
complexity methods to reconfigure the IRS elements. Examples
include the partitioning of the IRS array into multiple tiles
[3], the development of joint beam training and positioning
for fast beam-tracking schemes [4], and the use of variable-
size codebooks [5]. Besides, for the communication system to
operate, the passive IRS elements must be frequently updated

Fig. 1: Illustration of the mobility of the mobile user (MU)
and IRS coverage area.

using these methods while keeping track of the mobile users
(MUs) position in the network [6]. Consequently, the IRS
should track the MU position regularly and reconfigure the
IRS elements to illuminate the MU with the new position.

We illustrate this requirement with the diagram depicted in
Fig. 1, where an MU is connected to an access point (AP)
whenever it is located within the illuminated area, as there
is non-line-of-sight (NLOS) link to the AP. As a result, the
quality of the communication link in this mobile scenario is
determined not only by the SNR in the link but also by the
overhead incurred each time the MU is localized and the IRS
is updated, as during these time slots, data transmissions are
interrupted. The more frequently the IRS is updated, the better
the guarantees for the SNR, but the fewer the opportunities
for the users to transmit data, i.e., increased overhead. On
the contrary, the less frequently the IRS is updated, the lower
the communication link quality as the MU might leave the
illuminated area and experience a drop in SNR.

In this scenario, a training protocol for the IRS reconfigu-
ration can be designed that accounts for the update period
with the mobility of the MUs [7]. Reported examples in
the literature evaluate the update period assuming the worst-
case scenario, where a fixed channel coherence time is
considered, as in [8], or by assuming the MU deterministically
moves to the edge of the coverage area and at a constant
speed [9]. More straightforwardly, the authors in [10] evaluate
the IRS reconfiguration period to maximize the link’s sum
rate. The pilot interval to estimate the channel is increased
(reducing overhead) until the impact of channel variability starts

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

APIRSMU𝑧𝑥𝑦BlockageIlluminatedareaWaypoint 1Waypoint 2Waypoint 3This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

2

decrementing the SNR. While this study explicitly assesses
the time configuration period, it examines the effect of MU
mobility solely through its velocity component, overlooking
its specific mobility pattern.

In this paper, we adopt a more holistic approach utilizing
the age of information (AoI) concept to evaluate the IRS
update period. The AoI concept encompasses all aspects of the
communication link in a single formulation, including packet
transmission periods, channel impairments, and delays within
the communication pipeline [11], [12]. AoI-based solutions
for IRS-assisted links have been previously reported to maxi-
mize information freshness. Existing research targets packet
scheduling mechanisms in various network settings, e.g., in
IRS-empowered unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) systems [13],
[14], wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT) [15],
non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) networks [16], and
IRS-assisted secure communications [17]. Nonetheless, these
studies neglect the immediate effects of overhead from recon-
figuration packets, particularly when balancing overhead and
communication performance in mobile contexts.

We apply the AoI in the mobile scenario depicted in Fig. 7,
where a MU does not have line-of-sight (LOS) condition
to an AP and communication occurs through the IRS only.
We research a reconfiguration strategy for a low-overhead
transmission scheme focusing on minimizing the peak age
of information (PAoI) metric. We identify this approach as
the missing component in today’s literature for evaluating
the optimal update period of the IRS elements. Pursuing this
research direction, our main contributions can be summarized
as follows:

• We characterize the dynamic behavior of an IRS-assisted
link as a Markov regenerative process (MRGP), explicitly
accounting for MU mobility and the underlying transmis-
sion scheme.

• We formulate the trade-off between performance and
overhead in an AoI-based framework. The proposed AoI
framework encompasses the dynamics of the IRS-assisted
link and can be used to determine the optimal periodicity
for updating the IRS.1

• We propose a three-step methodology to exploit this theo-
retical model in a practical communication scenario. We
examine the overhead for realistic WiFi communication
links in the mmWave band, however, this methodology
also applies to other communication scenarios.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We discuss
the reported research on the join topics IRS and AoI in
Section II. We sketch the system model in Section III detailing
the transmission setup. We model the link status model as
a semi-Markov regeneration process in Section IV. The AoI-
based problem formulation is presented in Section V, deriving
analytical expressions to evaluate the minimum of the average
PAoI metric. We assess the performance in Section VI using
the derived analytical expressions. In this section, we also
illustrate the impact of overhead and mobility on the average

PAoI metric for a realistic WiFi link.2 Finally, we provide
concluding remarks in Section VII.

II. RELATED WORK

AoI has been used in IRS-assisted networks to characterize
the freshness of monitored sensor data. Existing studies target
various scenarios like Internet of Things (IoT) networks in
urban environments [18], where power and latencies are
predominant restrictions, and also UAV-assisted scenarios [12],
[14], [19]. Furthermore, AoI has also been used to maximize the
freshness of data between two users in covert communication
links as in [17], [20].

The considered systems comprise links between nodes and
base stations (BSs) or APs in urban environments with one
[16], [17], [20], [21] or multiple IRSs [18]. More complex
scenarios also include energy transfer from APs to nodes
using simultaneous transmitting and reflecting IRSs [22], as
well as SWIPT mechanisms [15], [23]. Other reports consider
communication between UAVs and IoT nodes through a fixed
IRS [14]. Furthermore, towards enhancing flexibility during
deployment, existing solutions have integrated IRSs with UAV
to avoid the latency introduced by relay nodes at the UAV [12],
[19], [24].

The freshness of data is mostly optimized using the average
AoI metric (and less frequently using the average PAoI as,
e.g., in [16]). The AoI metric is used, e.g., in combination
with communication schemes like hybrid automatic repeat
request (HARQ) error-control protocols [18], channel access
mechanisms with NOMA [19], [22], and full-duplex com-
munication links [21]. Integrating UAV-assisted links, the
information freshness is evaluated readily with the average
AoI metric
[12], using the average of AoI increase [14],
and also as a multi-objective function using an ultra-reliable
low-latency communication (URLLC)-based formulation, as
in [24].

AoI-based solutions often come with certain restrictions.
The power level
is typically part of the restriction due
to the limited battery capabilities of IoT nodes. Reported
research combines the communication reliability with the
outage probability [18], or the communication covertness
limiting the detection probabilities of unauthorized users [17],
[20]. Further constraints include successful packet reception
levels [16], SNR thresholds, the scheduling of the number of
nodes per time slot, and the mobility range of UAVs [12]–[15],
[19], [24].

Solutions using the AoI formulation are developed both
numerically and via machine learning (ML)-based methods,
aiming to control communication and mobility parameters
jointly. For instance, the alternating optimization algorithm
in [23] is used to find the beamforming vectors, configure
the IRS, and the scheduling of nodes. Genetic algorithms are
also reported to optimize the power and time scheduling of
nodes [22]. Successive convex approximation (SCA) [12], [17]
and the block coordinate descent (BCD) algorithms [19] are
reported to jointly control UAV mobility and the scheduling

1This framework establishes the basis for the formulation and solution of
optimization problems for the communication system design in future work.

2We provide open access to the code that evaluates the AoI metrics in

IRS-assisted link in https://github.com/tkn-tub/IRS_Rejuvenation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

3

Besides, pIRS denotes the position of the IRS, pAP refers to
the position of the AP, and || · || is the norm of a vector.

In Eq. (1), PLIRS,pobs is the free-space pathloss between the
IRS and the observation point pobs (within the MU mobility
plane), given by

PLIRS,pobs =

(cid:18)

λ
2π||pobs − pIRS||

(cid:19)2

.

(3)

Furthermore, gIRS(pobs) is the IRS gain, evaluated as the sum
of gains for each individual IRS-element, given by

× ej 2π

λ (||pn−pAP||+||pobs−pn||)ejωIRS(n),

(4)

I
{||pn−pIRS||< L

2 }×

N(cid:88) n

=1

gIRS(pobs) = ˜g

which follows from [26, Eq. (4)], where N is the total
number of IRS elements, L is the radius of the circumference
inscribed in the IRS plane (the purpose of this parameter is
elaborated later in this section), ωIRS(n) is the IRS phase shift
corresponding to its n-th element, pn is the position of the
n-th IRS element, and ˜g denotes the maximum gain of a given
IRS element, evaluated as

√

g =
˜

4πdwdh
λ

;

(5)

see [3, Eq. (12)], where dw and dh refer to the width and the
height of the unit cell, respectively.

In Eq. (1), the IRS phase shift coefficients are the primary
design variables, while the remaining parameters are predeter-
mined by the scenario setup, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The value
of ωIRS(n) is obtained based on the design proposed in [27,
Sec. III. B 2)] and [26, Sec. III A] to illuminate with a given
SNR the widest area possible. This coefficients design realizes
a linear mapping function; see [27, Eqs. (6) and (7)], which
focuses each radiation point from the IRS into an arbitrary
rectangular area in the xy plane. The size of the projected
rectangular area is adjusted with the beam-width parameters ∆x
and ∆y in [26, Eq. (6)] and [27, Eq. (7)]. However, to generate
a circular illuminated area, we programmatically disconnect
those IRS elements that are not contributing to the circular
shape; that is, the corresponding coefficients are set to zero
in (4) with the indicator function I. The indicator function is
equal to 1, whenever the position of the IRS element is within
the inscribed circle of the IRS, as follows from the condition
(||pn − pIRS|| < L
2 ) 4. We provide an illustrative example for
this calculation in Section VI-A, where a WiFi scenario setup
is evaluated.5

B. Transmission frame

of IoT nodes [19], as well as to jointly configure the IRS
and the packet length [17]. Using deep reinforcement learning
(DRL), off-on policies have been reported for various joint
designs with reinforcement Q-learning, deep Q-network (DQN),
and proximal policy optimization (PPO) policies. For instance,
reinforcement Q-learning is reported to jointly find the location
of the UAV-IRS [24]. IRS and the packet service time are
also jointly configured with DQN [14]. DQNs has also been
proposed for the evaluation of the transmission scheduling only,
as in [24].

Despite the rich literature and the optimal configuration
of IRSs,
there is no solution for the optimal periodicity
for reconfiguring the IRS elements. Analyzing the optimal
periodicity allows determining the right balance between
the overhead introduced for configuring the IRS and the
communication performance. As we continue in the following
sections, we will illustrate the relevancy of this concern in
mobile scenarios, where the IRS has to be frequently updated to
guarantee a good communication performance, i.e., a particular
QoS level.

III. SYSTEM MODEL

We study a communication downlink between an AP and
an MU that moves at walking speed. The communication link
is facilitated via the reflection of an IRS, where we assume
NLOS conditions between the AP and the MU, as depicted
in Fig. 1. The IRS provides coverage for a circular area of
radius rin, a shape that has also been considered in wireless
scenarios, as in [25].3 The achieved SNR is sufficiently high
in the illuminated area to realize error-free transmissions with
a certain data rate. Under this general model, three important
elements of the communication link include: i) the IRS-assisted
link abstracted with the SNR in the illuminated area, ii) the
transmission frame in the downlink delimiting the time slots
for communication, and iii) the communication-link dynamics
given the MU mobility model. We elaborate on these elements
in the following subsections.

A. IRS-assisted Link Model

We model the impact of the IRS-assisted link using the SNR
in the MU plane. At a given observation point in the xy plane,
denoted as pobs, the SNR is given by the relation

SNR(pobs) = |gIRS(pobs)|2 PTxPLAP,IRSPLIRS,pobs

PN

,

(1)

which follows from [3, Eq. (2)], where PTx is the transmit
power, PN is the noise power, the variable PLAP,IRS is the
free-space pathloss AP-to-IRS link, given by

PLAP,IRS =

(cid:18)

λ
2π||pIRS − pAP||

(cid:19)2

,

Transmissions between the AP and the MU take place
according to the frame structure depicted in Fig. 2, which

(2)

where λ = c/f is the wavelength of the transmitted signal, c is
the speed of light, and f the center frequency for transmission.

3We assume the circular geometry for the ease of evaluating the impact
of MU mobility, as introduced later in Section IV-C1. We remark that this
assumption does not limit the general model introduced in Section IV, which
is independent of the geometry of the illuminated area.

4Hence, the activated IRS-elements resemble an IRS with circular shape.
The indicator function is equal to 1, whenever the position of the IRS element
is within the inscribed circle of the IRS, as follows from the condition (||pn −
pIRS|| < L
2 ). We note that we adopt this strategy to have a simple mapping
function. In principle, more sophisticated mapping functions or optimization-
based designs can be developed to exploit the disconnected IRS elements.

5The Matlab code for the IRS coefficient implementation is provided in

https://github.com/tkn-tub/IRS_Rejuvenation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

4

C. Mobility model for the MU

As for the user’s mobility, we assume the MU moves
according to the random waypoint (RWP) mobility model [30].
In this model, the MU repeatedly selects a random destination
point in a given area A (in our case, a circle of radius rout > rin,
as depicted in Fig. 1) and moves with constant speed on a
straight line between the departure and destination points. The
random selection of the destination point follows a uniform
probability distribution in the area. We also consider the case
where the MU stops for a random time interval when reaching
a destination and the case when the user moves at a random
speed to the destination as well. We provide further details
about the mobility models in Sections IV-C1 and IV-D.

IV. MODELING THE LINK STATUS AS A SEMI-MARKOV
REGENERATIVE PROCESS

Before formulating the average PAoI, we provide insights
into evaluating the fraction of time that the communication
link is in any of the following three states:

i) Error-free transmission: This occurs when the MU is
located in the illuminated area, i.e., inside the inner circle
in Fig. 1.

ii) Transmission with error: This happens when the MU

moves out of the illuminated region.

iii) Interruption of transmissions: Occurring when the IRS is

being reconfigured.

These three states define all possible link statuses between the
AP and the MU. We evaluate the fraction of time for each
given state as the ratio between the duration of a given state to
the update interval Tupd, yielding the portion of Tupd where
the link is error-free, transmission with errors, or interrupted.
Evaluating this fraction of time lets us to determine the average
amplitude of the peaks in the AoI curve and, accordingly, the
average PAoI that we formulate later in Section V.

The transition time instants between the above three states
are generally a result of a random process. The MU stays in
the illuminated area for a random amount of time as long
as its corresponding waypoints are inside the inner circle in
Fig. 1. However, depending on the periodicity of the IRS
reconfiguration (Tupd), the MU will reach the outside area
more or less quickly. It can also perform transitions between
both areas due to the random mobility.

These transition patterns between areas are repeatedly
generated during the MU localization phase, again starting
the process regularly. The communication link will remain in
a given state for a random time, except during the localization
and IRS reconfiguration, where the link is interrupted (third
state above) for a fixed amount of time (Tloc + TIRS); see the
transmission scheme in Fig. 2.

We model the dynamics of these three states by an MRGP
[31, Sec. 10.6], allowing us to evaluate the time intervals
of these states. In contrast to a pure Markov process, the
MRGP model introduces random durations among transitions
between states, allowing us to account for the random transition
between error-free transmission and transmission with errors
in the communication link. Besides, the MRGP model defines
regeneration points, defined as those time instants where the

Fig. 2: Frame structure for IRS-assisted downlink transmis-
sion [27].

follows from [27]. Communication is performed in three
phases. Firstly, the MU is localized by the AP along the time
interval Tloc, as depicted within the first slot in Fig. 2. Using
a given localization algorithm, the user is localized within
the outer circle in Fig. 1.6 Secondly, the IRS is configured
in the time interval TIRS to illuminate the MU. Thirdly, data
transmission occurs per packet, where each packet comprises a
preamble and a training field, as additional overhead along the
interval Tp_ovh, and the data in time interval Tdata. Following
this transmission scheme, the MU is localized, and the IRS
reconfigured with the period Tupd when the MU’s position is
again updated, and the IRS reconfigured. Implicitly, we also
assume there is always data to transmit in the available slots,
and queues are not included as we consider a point-to-point
link only.

Using this transmission scheme, the data communication
period increases with the overhead introduced in time slots Tloc,
TIRS, Tp_ovh and the idle time (Tidle). The resulting overhead
along the time interval Tupd can be evaluated as

Tovh = Tloc + TIRS + ch(Tp_ovh + TIdle),

where

ch =

(cid:24) Tupd − (Tloc + TIRS)
Tp_ovh + Tdata + TIdle

(cid:25)

,

(6)

(7)

is the number of packets emitted during Tupd, and ⌈·⌉ denotes
the ceiling operation. Due to this overhead, the AP in the link
can perform transmissions with the equivalent time

TTx = Tdata +

Tdata
Tupd − Tovh

Tovh.

(8)

The calculation in Eq. (8) accounts for the impact of overhead
on the effective data transmission time. The second term in
the sum above proportionally distributes the total overhead
(evaluated with Tupd) among the total of data packets fitting
within the time interval Tupd. This is evaluated as we divide
Tovh by the number of packets within Tupd, yielding Tupd−Tovh
.
In practice, the AP performs a new packet transmission at
periods larger than Tdata and given by TTx.

Tdata

6Localization algorithms that do not rely on IRS are surveyed in [28],
whereas IRS-assisted localization schemes are reviewed in [29]. The design
and analysis of the methodology proposed in this paper are independent of
the specific adopted localization scheme.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

⋮𝑇updIRS configuration(𝑇IRS)Data transmission (𝑇data)PreamblePacket overhead (𝑇p_ovh)MUlocalization (𝑇loc)Idle TimeTraining fieldsThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

5

• Transition between states: This is denoted with boxes,
where the empty ones represent the random transitions
between the states, while the filled boxes indicate the
deterministic transitions.

• Connections between states and transitions: These con-
nections are represented with directed arrows, providing
direction among states.

• The current state of the link: This is denoted with a token,
depicted with a dot. Fig. 3 depicts the initial condition in
the link with the dot in the circle Sin, i.e., the node is in
the illuminated area, and transmissions are error-free.
The boxes govern transitions between the circles (places)
through the firing of events.7 This firing refers to the boxes’
activation; upon activation, the token at the input is moved to
the box’s output, representing the dynamic transition from the
input to the output place. Furthermore, a box only enables the
token’s transition to the next state if a token is present at its
input; otherwise, the firing does not occur. This representation
also assumes that deterministic firing has priority over random
firing. Whenever Tupd occurs, the token transitions from place
Sin or Sout to SIRS.

As the transition is governed by the MU location, the firing

is accordingly defined with the following variables:

• Tout, a continuous stochastic variable indicating the MU
transition from the illuminated area to the outer area in
Fig. 1;

• Tin, a continuous stochastic variable indicating the MU
transition from the outer area to the illuminated area;
• Tupd, a deterministic variable indicating the MU’s position
is updated while using a given localization algorithm
(running at the AP); this firing occurs at regular time
intervals;

• TIRS, a deterministic variable indicating the IRS has been

reconfigured and transmissions start again.

Given the firing rules, the evolution of the PN is described
by the distribution of tokens at places Sin, Sout, and SIRS. This
distribution of tokens is defined by a vector, referred to as a
mark [36], where each vector component is an integer number
denoting the number of tokens at places Sin, Sout, and SIRS. In
the network in Fig. 3, there will be only three different marks
as there are only a single token and three places. These marks
are evaluated as follows: Departing from the initial mark, we
have the vector MIRS = [1, 0, 0], denoting a single token is
located at SIRS. This mark denotes the case when the node is
localized, and the IRS reconfigured. We evaluate the other two
marks as Min = [0, 1, 0], indicating a token is located at Sin,
and Mout = [0, 0, 1] indicating the token is located at Sout.
These two cases imply that the MU is within and outside the
illuminated area, respectively.

Furthermore, the transitions of the token from one place to
another can be represented by transitions between markers,
which define the reachability graph as depicted in Fig. 4.
This graph indicates which mark is reachable from the others
according to the random (Tin, Tout) and deterministic (Tupd,
TIRS) firing of events. As a result of the process dynamics, all

7Within the Petri Net representation places refers to states, i.e., Sin, Sout,

and SIRS in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3: Pictorial representation of the MRSPN.

random process replicates. In our case, the regeneration points
are determined by the IRS reconfiguration, which will place the
MU again inside the illuminated area, and the process repeats.
In contrast to a continuous-time Markov process, a Markov
regenerative process relaxes the requirement of time inde-
pendence. This requirement states that the waiting time for
the next transition is independent of the time elapsed in the
current state, which does not apply to the three states of the
considered communication link; see [32, Eq. (12.1.13)]. In our
current setup, the waiting time during MU localization and
IRS reconfiguration is deterministic, while for the other two
states (error-free transmission and transmission with error), the
waiting time is random.

With the MRGP model, we follow a similar procedure
as in [33], where a software system is periodically reset as
preventive maintenance to subside failures. Analogously, in
our case, the software components refer to the process running
at the AP to implement the transmission scheme with the MU,
i.e., localizing the MU, configuring the IRS, and performing
transmissions. Failures are identified whenever the MU is not
in the illuminated area, and maintenance corresponds with the
MU localization and the IRS reconfiguration, after which the
MU is again illuminated. This way, the communication process
resembles a fault-tolerant system as in [33].

To derive the MRGP model, we follow the procedure in [33],
where the evolution of the communication link is described
first with a Markov regenerative stochastic Petri net (MRSPN)
scheme. Then, we derive the reachability graph yielding the
MRGP model representation, see also [34]. Finally, we evaluate
the corresponding transition probabilities using the formulation
of local and global kernels.

A. Stochastic Petri Net Representation

As depicted in Fig. 3, the Petri net (PN) representation allows
for a graphical depiction of the flow of events [35] and also
identifies the transition probabilities and regeneration points of
the MRGP model [34]. As shown in Fig. 3, this representation
ecompases the following features:

• The link status: Denoted with the three circles, also refered
to as places, where Sin stands for the event when the node
is in the illuminated area (error-free transmissions), Sout
indicates that the node is outside the illuminated area
(transmissions with errors), and SIRS denotes the case
when the node is localized and the IRS is reconfigured
(no transmission happens).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

𝑆in𝑆IRS𝑇upd𝑆out𝑇in𝑇out𝑇IRSThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

with

Tconf = Tloc + TIRS.

6

(12)

This formulation states that the MU will remain with probability
one in the MIRS state along time interval [0, Tconf ], whenever
Tupd triggers.

The term E12 evaluates the probability that the process con-
tinues to be in Min before the first regeneration point Tupd. We
recall that MIRS denotes the localization and IRS configuration
processes, after which the MU is again illuminated. Thereby,
the token will be at place Sin immediately after TIRS and
will stay within the illuminated area with probability Pin till
the next regeneration point. Evaluating these two conditions
together yields

0
1
Pin(t − t0 < Tupd)

when t ≤ Tconf
when Tconf < t ≤ rin
v
when t > Tconf

 

E12 =

(13)
where Pin(t < Tupd) denotes the probability that the MU
remains inside the inner circle till
the next regeneration
point Tupd. In Section IV-C we evaluate the probability that
the MU leaves the illuminated circular area departing from
an arbitrary location within the circle, here denoted with
Pin(t < Tupd). As we assume that the localization phase
centers the circle of the illuminated area in the MU position, see
Fig. 1, we introduce the time shift t0 = Tconf − rin
v accounting
for the initial MU’s location in the circle center instead, where
rin
v accounts for the minimum time the MU takes to travel
from the the center of the illuminated area to the outside
area. This probability ultimately depends on the MU’s mobility
pattern. We illustrate the calculation and the validation of this
probability in Section IV-C for various RWP mobility models.

Similarly, E13 is evaluated as follows

E13(t) =Pout(t − Tconf < Tupd)u(t − Tconf ),

(14)

where Pout(t < Tupd) denotes the probability that the MU
stays in the outer area and assuming the MU’s initial position
is in the same outer area. In this equation, we introduce the
time shift Tconf as this event always occurs after the IRS is
reconfigured. We evaluate this probability in Section IV-E.

The two kernels in (9) and (10) allow us to evaluate the

steady-state transition probability, as [33, Eq. (5)]

πq =

(cid:80)

(cid:80)

k∈Ω pkαkq
(cid:80)

,

(15)

k∈Ω pk
where q ∈ {1, 2, 3} denotes three link states, namely IRS
reconfiguration, error-free transmission, and transmision with
errors, respectively. Moreover, αk,q is given by

l∈Ω αkl

αkq =

(cid:90) ∞

0

Ekq(t)dt,

(16)

and pk in Eq. (15) are the components of p as a 1 × n vector,
which is the solution to the equation

p = pK(∞),

(17)

under the condition (cid:80)
i∈Ω′ pi = 1. As this condition states
that p1 = 1 (there is only a single regeneration state as MIRS),
and K(∞) = 1 (see Eq. (9)), the evaluation of (17) yields the

Fig. 4: Reachability graph of the MRSPN.

the marks are reachable from each other with a direct transition,
except for MIRS, which always transits to Min.

B. Modeling the Link Dynamics using MRGP

The marks of the MRSPN readily define an MRGP; see
[34, Theorem 2]. The state space of the underlying MRGP is
directly given by the marks set as Ω = {MIRS, Min, Mout}.
The regenerative points are defined by the transitions to the
state MIRS, where the stochastic process restarts again with
the MU mobility pattern. Consequently, the regenerative set
comprises only a single element namely Ω′ = {MIRS}.

The MRGP is completely described by the local and global
kernels probabilities (see [34, Theorem 3]), which are defined
as follows [33, Definition 2].

Global kernel K(t): This is an m × m matrix, where m is
the cardinality of the regenerative set Ω′ (in our case m = 1).
The global kernel evaluates the process at the regeneration
points (given by Tupd) with the conditional probability

K(t) =[K11(t)] = [Pr{Z(Tupd) = MIRS, Tupd ≤ t |

|Z(T0) = MIRS}],

(9)

= [u(t − Tupd)],

where the Kernel’s index “11” refers to state MIRS, Z indicates
the MU’s state, T0 denotes the initial time instant when the
stochastic process starts, and u(t) is the unit step function. We
evaluate this conditional probability with the step function in
(9), as the token is forced to return to place SIRS at Tupd, and
the condition Z(Tupd) = MIRS will occur with probability
one whenever t ≥ Tupd, see Fig. 3. In the meantime, the link
is transitioning between Sin and Sout.

Local kernel E(t): This is an m × n matrix, where n is
the cardinality of the state space Ω (in our case n = 3), that
evaluates the behavior of the marks between two consecutive
regenerative points. E(t) results in the 1 × 3 vector

E(t) = [Eiq(t)] = [Pr{Z(t) = Zq, Tupd > t | Z(T0) = Zi}],
(10)

= (cid:2)E11(t) E12(t) E13(t)(cid:3) .

where the lettered subscripts i and q denote the departing
and arriving states, respectively, i, q ∈ {1, 2, 3}, and the
corresponding Z’s are Z1 = MIRS, Z2 = Min, and Z3 = Mout.
In Eq. (10), the entry E11(t) refers to the probability that
the process running at the AP is in the localization and IRS
configuration phases (denoted as MIRS), given that the process
always initiates at the same state MIRS. This probability is
readily obtained as

E11(t) = 1 − u(t − Tconf ),

(11)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

𝑀IRS[1,0,0]𝑀in[0,1,0]𝑀out[0,0,1]𝑇upd𝑇in𝑇out𝑇IRS𝑇updThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

7

reaches the outer area in Fig. 1. Denoting this probability as
Pfh_out(t), we readily compute Pin(t) as

Pin(t) = 1 − Pfh_out(t).

(19)

Following the RWP mobility model, we decompose the
calculation of Pfh_out into two steps. In the first step, we
compute the probability for the MU to leave the inner circle,
see Fig. 1, with the first-hitting time probability. We evaluate
the probability for the number of consecutive waypoints inside
the inner circle before the MU transitions to the outer area. In
the second step, we evaluate the probability of the elapsed time
between waypoints in the inner circle and add those random
variables. The sum provides a close estimate of the total time
the MU spends within the illuminated area, resulting in Pin(t).
We illustrate this approximation later with Section IV-D and
graphically in Fig. 6.

1) First-hitting time probability: To evaluate this probability,
we need to compute the survival probability first; which
evaluates the probability for the MU to stay in the inner
circle for j-consecutive waypoints. Here denoted as Sj, this
evaluation introduces the impact of the particular geometry
of the illuminated area, in our case a circle of arbitrary
radius rin. The probability of selecting a waypoint in the
inner circle of area Ain is directly given as p = Ain
A , where
A denotes the area of the outer circle in Fig. 1. In this
way, the value for p inherently evaluates equal probability
of displacing to any point in A, following the RWP model;
see [30]. Consequently, the probability that the MU selects j-
consecutive waypoints within the inner circle yields the survival
probability Sj = (cid:0) Ain
, j ⩾ 0, as each waypoint selection is
independently performed. Given Sj, the first-hitting probability
is readily evaluated as [37]

(cid:1)j

A

PJout(j) = SJ (j) − SJ (j + 1) =

(cid:18) Ain
A

(cid:19)j (cid:18)

1 −

(cid:19)

,

Ain
A

(20)

Ain
A

∈ (0,1), j ⩾ 0,

which represents the first-hitting time probability in the discrete
space of jumps, and Jout is a random variable denoting the
waypoint where the MU is for the first time outside the
illuminated area.

2) First-hitting time probability in the time-space: For each
performed jump, the MU moves a random distance lj with a
given speed v, where the probability density function (PDF)
for lj is given as [30, Eq. (23)]

fL(lj) =

(cid:18)

8
πrin

lj
2rin

(cid:18) lj
2rin

(cid:115)

1 −

arccos

−

lj
2rin

(cid:19)

(21)

(cid:18) lj
2rin

(cid:19)2(cid:19)

.

Fig. 5: Fraction of time (see (18)) for the three states in the
link considering rin = 1.7 m, rout = 3 m, and mobility of
constant speed v = 1 m/s without stop time.

trivial solution p = [1 0 0]. Replacing this solution into (15)
finally evaluates πj as

πq =

α1,q
l∈Ω α1,l

(cid:80)

,

(18)

By definition, πq in (18) provides the proportion of time
the token is on each place with respect to the time interval
between regeneration points (see [34, Theorem 6]). In our case,
it refers to the proportion of time the link is in either of the
above-mentioned states: transmitting error-free, transmitting
with errors, or non-transmitting. We will use this equation to
evaluate the average PAoI in Section V.

The proportion of time vector πq will ultimately depend on
the probability that the MU is inside the illuminated area (Pin),
outside (Pout), and the amount of time needed to localize
and reconfigure the IRS (Tconf ). To illustrate, Fig. 5 depicts
the fraction of time for the three communication link states
after numerically evaluating (18), and using the calculations
made in the next sections for the probabilities Pin and Pout.
We choose to illustrate assuming the RWP mobility model
with speed 1 m/s for the MU and with the inner radius of the
illuminated area as 1.7 m; this is the illuminated area where
the IRS-assisted link evaluates no packet errors (evaluated
later in Section VI). The link is with probability one (π1 =
1) in the localization and reconfiguration phases whenever
Tupd ≤ (Tloc + TIRS) and starts to decrease afterward. As
Tupd increases, the MU reduces its probability to stay inside
the illuminated area (π2). Eventually, the MU starts to spend
time in the outer area with increased probability, which follows
the curve π3. In the following, we provide the calculations for
Pin with the RWP mobility model. A similar procedure will
follow to evaluate Pout.

C. Evaluating the Probability for MU to Stay Inside the
Illuminated Area

We evaluate the probability for error-free transmissions as
the probability that the MU stays inside the illuminated area
(denoted as Pin in (13)). To evaluate this probability, we first
compute the first-hitting-time probability [37] that the MU

We evaluate (21) considering the MU displaces in the inner
circle only, as we aim to evaluate the elapsed time interval
before the MU leaves it. For this case, we assume lj ∈ [0, 2rin],
where rin denotes the radius of the inner circle in Fig. 1.

Using the formulation in Eq. (21), we can consider three
different cases for the MU mobility pattern. In the first case,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

01020304000.20.40.60.810102000.51This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

8

(a) RWP mobility model when the MU dis-
places with constant speed 1 m/s, without
stop time.

(b) RWP mobility model with random
stop time following an exponential distribu-
tion fTp (τ ) = µe−µτ and mean waiting
time µ = 2 s.

(c) RWP mobility model when the MU
displaces with random speed based on the
uniform distribution between vmin and vmax,
where vmin = 0.5 m/s and vmax = 1.5 m/s.

Fig. 6: Validation for the Pin in (19) with simulation of the RWP mobility for inner circle radius 1 m. The exponential
distribution in b) follows [30, Example in page 561], the uniform distribution in c) follows [30, Sec. 3.5.1].

where fτj ;rin is obtained using Equations (22) to (24) depending
on the mobility model.10 This relation is evaluated numerically
as no closed-form expression exists for the N -fold convolution
of any of the functions in Eqs. (27). To summarize, we evaluate
the probability of the MU leaving the inner circle for the first
time with (26), where PJout(j) as given by (20) and P (Tout|j)
is evaluated numerically by integrating the PDF in Eq. (27).

D. Validating the Theoretical Expression for Pin(t)

We validated the theoretical expressions for the Pin(t) in (19)
through simulations. We evaluated the probability after 1000
realizations accounting for the time instant when the MU
leaves the inner circle for the first time. We simulated the
three mobility models tracking the position of the MU and
recorded the time when the MU leaves the inner area, giving
the results illustrated in Fig. 6 for the three different models
in Equations (22) to (24). The theoretical formulation for Pin
in (19) manifests a good correspondence with the simulation
of the three RWP mobility models as illustrated in Fig. 6.

E. Evaluating the Probability that the MU Stays Outside of
the Illuminated Area

To evaluate the probability that

the MU stays outside
the illuminated area, we follow the same procedure as in
Section IV-C. We compute the first-hitting time at which the
MU reaches the inner circle Pfh_in when initially being in the
outer area, and evaluate the probability for the MU to remain
in the outer circle as

Pout(t) = 1 − Pfh_in(t).

(28)

To compute Pfh_in, we evaluate the survival probability as in
Eq. (20), just replacing Ain with (A − Ain). Then, to evaluate
Pfh_in(t), we use the same formulation for the total probability
as in (26), but replacing Tout with Tin. Besides, P (Tin|j) is
evaluated with its corresponding PDF, similarly formulated as
in (27), after replacing rin with rout, to evaluate fτj ;rout. We

10Evaluating (27) as the convolution implicitly assumes the MU starts at a

random position inside the inner circle.

the MU moves with constant speed v between waypoints along
the time interval τj = 1

v lj, where (see [30, Eq. (28)])
(cid:18)

(cid:19)

fτj ;rin = vfL(vτj), τj ∈

0,

(22)

2rin
v

In the second case, the MU performs a random pause time Tp
with PDF fTp (tp), yielding [30, Eq. (39)]

fτ ′

j ;rin =

(cid:90) τ ′

0

fτj ;rin (τ )fTp (τ ′ − τ )dτ .

(23)

In the last case, the MU displaces at a random speed v following
fV (v) as the PDF, yielding [30, Eq. (39)]

fτ ′

j ;rin =

(cid:90) vmax

vmin

vfτj ;rin (τ )fV (v)dv.

(24)

We approximate the total time elapsed till the MU displaces
out of the inner circle as the sum of the time intervals along
J-consecutive waypoints except for the last one as8

τj,

(25)

Jout−1

(cid:88) j

=1

Tout ≈

P (Tout|j)PJout(j),

(26)

∞(cid:88) j

=1

Pfh_out(t) =

where Jout is a random variable denoting the waypoint when
the MU leaves the inner circle for the first time, see for instance
the case depicted in Fig. 1 where Jout = 3.

To provide a formula for the probability that the MU leaves
the inner circle for the first time before Tupd, we use the
formula for the total probability, yielding [38]

(27)

,

τj =tout

(cid:12)(cid:12)

fTout (tout|j) = fτj ;rin ∗ · · · ∗ fτj ;rin
(cid:124)
(cid:125)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
j

as (25) is the sum of an arbitrary amount of random variables τj,
where P (Tout|j) denotes the probability for the total elapsed
time along j-jumps, evaluated through the corresponding PDF9

8This approximation is a pessimistic calculation for the elapsing time inside
the illuminated area. The exact time is larger, and it evaluates the time interval
just when the MU intercepts the perimeter of the illuminated area.

9As the elapsing time is the sum of independent time intervals between
jumps (see (25)), its corresponding PDF can be evaluated using the N -fold
convolution of fτj ; see [38].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

00.20.40.60.81Time [s]00.20.40.60.81Theoretical CurveSimulation01234Time [s]00.20.40.60.81Theoretical CurveSimulation00.20.40.60.81Time [s]00.20.40.60.81Theoretical CurveSimulationThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

9

A. Integrating the System Model within the AoI Concept

Although Eq. (29) is not that explicit per se, the height
of the peaks in the AoI directly reflects the dynamics in the
communication link. We substantiate this statement through
the following facts:

• The transmission time in the downlink (TTx in (8))
corresponds to the time interval between the generation
of two successive packets in the AoI formulation, i.e.,
the generation time (t(i+1) − ti) is equal to TTx; see the
illustration in Fig. 7. Besides, as TTx also accounts for
the communication overhead and the latency (due to the
packet size) in the link, the generation time also conveys
the same two components (overhead and latency); see the
dependency of TTx with Tovh and Tdata in (8).

• The two link conditions, error-free transmission and
transmission with errors, are included within the system
time (Ts = t′
i − ti). When the link is error-free, the
system time is the minimum possible and equal to the
transmission delay, e.g., t′
2 −t2 = Td; see Fig. 2. However,
when the link causes errors, the system time increases
until the MU returns to the area illuminated by the IRS
or the IRS is again reconfigured to illuminate the MU.
In this regard, the system time is a random variable that
depends on the size of the illuminated area (defined by
the IRS), the mobility pattern of the MU, and the update
period of the IRS.

• As a result of the above interrelation of the generation
and system times with the system model parameters, the
impact of the transmission overhead, IRS reconfiguration,
and mobility is jointly evaluated within the amplitude
of the peaks in the AoI curve, as directly follows from
Eq. (29). In this way, the average PAoI metric accounts
for the overhead and the dynamics of the communication
link between interruption of transmissions, errors-free
transmission, and transmission with error.

• Finally, the average PAoI metric is minimized based on
the IRS update period (Tupd), allowing us to optimally
balance the impact of overhead and throughput in the link.

In the next section, we elaborate on a closed-form expression
for the average PAoI metric and illustrate the optimal IRS
update period.

B. Closed-form expression for the average PAoI

To obtain a closed-form expression for ∆(p), we consider the
temporal evolution of the AoI curve in Fig. 7. The evolution
of the AoI curve follows the dynamic of the communication
system according to the three states illustrated in Fig. 4. The
corresponding height of the peaks can be evaluated for these
three different cases as follows:

Case 1 (IRS is reconfigured): This is the initial state, where
the MU is localized and the IRS is reconfigured; see Fig. 2. In
this state, transmissions are interrupted along the time interval
Tconf = Tloc + TIRS. This case is already included within the
transmission time interval TTx in Eq. (8); see the dependency
of the Tovh term with (Tloc + TIRS) in Eq. (6).

Fig. 7: Illustration of the AoI of packets (dashed lines) and as
perceived on a given destination node (bold line).

note that, following these calculations, we implicitly assume the
worst-case scenario, thus avoiding the calculation of possible
interceptions between the MU trajectory and the illuminated
area.

V. AOI FRAMEWORK

In the following, we theoretically formulate the average
PAoI metric to balance the overhead and data transmission
time slots. We aim to evaluate the update period of the IRS,
with the value of Tupd in Fig. 2, and balance the trade-off
between overhead and transmission opportunities. The more
frequently we update the IRS (smaller Tupd), the higher the
chances of error-free transmissions, as the MU will be mostly
in the illuminated area. However, with the increased update
frequency, the overhead becomes larger, thereby limiting the
availability of time slots to transmit data. Conversely, reducing
the frequency of updates (increased Tupd) allows more time
slots for transmission. Yet, this is at the expense of more errors
and less throughput, as the MU will increasingly spend more
time outside the illuminated area between IRS updates. Such a
dynamic behavior evidences a trade-off between overhead and
throughput that we aim to balance with the AoI framework in
this section.

The PAoI metric results from the sequence of peaks in
the AoI curve, which is evaluated based on the generation
(ti+1 − ti) and system (t′
i − ti) times, where ti denotes the
time instant when a packet is generated, and t′
i is the time
when it is successfully received; see their representation in
Fig. 7.11 Following the illustration in this figure, the AoI curve
is the continuous line and the PAoI refers to the sequence
of peaks Ai. The AoI curve will linearly increase between
consecutive receptions (e.g., between t′
2) following
the increasing age of the most recent received packet (e.g.,
at t′
1). As a result, the AoI is a sawtooth curve with peaks
{A0, A1, . . . } representing the highest age at the reception
time. The average PAoI, denoted as ∆(p), corresponds to the
average of the sequence of peaks and is evaluated as

1 and t′

∆(p) = E[Ai] = E[Tg] + E[Ts]

(29)

as follows from [39, Def. 3.3.2], where Tg = ti+1 − ti denotes
the generation time, and Ts = t′

i − ti is the system time.

11This definition follows [11] and [39, Def. 3.1].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

𝑇𝑑∆𝑡𝑡1𝑡2𝑡1′𝑡3𝑡2′𝑡4𝑡5𝑡4′∆0𝐴0𝐴3𝐴2𝐴1𝑇Tx𝑡5′This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

10

Case 2 (MU is inside the illuminated area): In this case,
errors do not occur, and the height of the peaks can readily be
evaluated as

Ai,in = Td + TTx,

(30)

along the time interval inside the illuminated area, where
Td = c
d is the communication delay between the MU and the
AP, c is the speed of light and d is the sum of the distances
between the MU and the IRS and between the IRS and the AP.
The relation in (30) computes the time elapsed between two
consecutive receptions [40]; see for example the reception at t′
1
and t′
2 in Fig. 7, where TTx = ti+1 − ti and Td = t′
i − ti are
assumed to be deterministic variables. This event (amplitude of
the peaks) will occur with the steady state probability πj|j=2
as a result of evaluating (18).

Fig. 8: Resulting average PAoI assuming the RWP mobility
model with v = 1 m/s for the MU, rin = 1.7 m, and outer
radius rout = 3 m.

× π′
3,
(cid:24) π3Tupd
TTx

(33)

(cid:25)

TTx × π′
3,

To=π3Tupd

3) +
(cid:25)

2 + π′
(cid:24) π3Tupd
TTx

= (Td + TTx) +

TTx × π′
3.

= (Td + TTx) × (π′

(cid:12)(cid:12)

∆(p) = Ain × π′

2 + Ai,out

average PAoI as

Eq. (33) jointly accounts for the impact of the overhead and
communication errors. The overhead is included in TTx (see
(8)), while the communication errors are accounted for in the
terms π3 and π′
3, as these two probabilities reflect the case
when the MU is outside the illuminated area. To illustrate these
two mechanisms, we depict the impact of the two mentioned
components in Fig. 8. Reducing Tupd will increase the AoI as
the overhead increases. Conversely, increasing Tupd will also
increase the age of information as the MU will spend time
outside the illuminated area with increasing probability. In the
next section, we provide more insights into this calculation
and its practical use to balance the overhead introduced by the
IRS in the communication link.

VI. RESULTS: BALANCING THE IMPACT OF THE OVERHEAD
AND PACKET LOSSES FOR A WIFI SCENARIO

2, π′

This section illustrates the application of the above theoretical
formulation and studies the optimal reconfiguration periodicity
for the IRS. The optimal balance is attainable by minimizing
the expression in Eq. (33); however, its evaluation is not
straightforward as we need first to evaluate its dependency on
the probabilities π′
3 and π3 within the application scenario.
We also need to evaluate the dependency of the average PAoI
metric with Tupd, TTx and Td according to the communication
protocol and the communication distances. For this evaluation,
we choose a functional scenario where we implement a
communication link over WiFi in the mmWave band.12 We
illustrate the average PAoI metric for a communication system
compliant with the IEEE 802.11ad standard and provide
realistic performance values.

12Other particular communication scenarios (as in fifth generation (5G)) are
also applicable as long as they follow a packet-format scheme as illustrated
in Fig. 2.

Case 3 (MU is outside the illuminated area): In this case,
packets are not decoded and thereby dropped, leading to an
increase of the AoI. See the case depicted in Fig. 7, where
the packet at t3 is not received, and the age increases till the
reception of the next emitted packet at t′
4. Specifically, the peak
AoI increases by the amount TTx, i.e., as (TTx + Tdata + TTx),
as the receiver must wait to create the next packet at t4. When
considering an arbitrary time interval for the MU to stay outside
the illuminated area, denoted as To, the waiting time before
× TTx. In this way, the
the next packet arrives yields
corresponding peak in the AoI curve is readily evaluated as

(cid:108) To
TTx

(cid:109)

Ai,out = Td + TTx +

(cid:25)

(cid:24) To
TTx

TTx,

(31)

occurring with the steady state probability πj|j=3 as a result of
evaluating Eq. (18). This formulation implicitly assumes that
errors will happen independently of the time duration outside
the illuminated area, i.e., as long as To > 0.

We evaluate the average PAoI based on Cases 2 and 3, as we
consider the overhead from the first case already introduced in
the formulation for TTx as in (8). For this evaluation, we use the
fraction of time relative to the time interval for transmissions
only, i.e., after the localization and reconfiguration phases along
the time interval (Tupd − Tloc − TIRS); see Fig. 2. Accounting
for the inclusion of Tconf = Tloc + TIRS within the Cases 2
and 3, we proportionally increase both probabilities π2 and
π3 with (π2π1) and (1 − π2)π1, respectively, as these terms
evaluate the fraction of time (given by π2π1 in Case 2) of
transmissions that proportionally includes Tconf , as provided
by (π2 + π2π1)Tupd. These evaluations yield the following
probabilities

π′
2 = π2 + π2π1
π′
3 = π3 + (1 − π2)π1,

(32)

complying with the relation π′
2 + π′
3 = 1. Then, using (30) and
(31) and evaluating the average time that the MU is outside
the illuminated area as To = π3Tupd, we can calculate the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

11

TABLE I: Simulation parameters.

Variable

Description

Value

Preamble field length
Maximum data field length

Training field length
Idle time
Modulation and coding
scheme

4352 samples
456 768 samples
≈ 262 kB
3712 samples
20 µs
12.6

Total of IRS reflecting ele-
ments

160 × 160

frequency, corre-

Sampling rate
Receiver bandwidth
Carrier
sponding to Channel 2
Transmitter peak power
Number of AP antennas
Number of AP beams
Gain per AP beam
Noise figure
Thermal noise density
Receiver interference den-
sity
Noise floor

AP’s location
IRS’s location
MU’s initial location
MU’s speed

1.76 GHz
2640 MHz
60.48 GHz

30 dBm
8
4
9 dBi
7 dB
−174 dBm/Hz
−165.7 dBm/Hz

≈ −70 dBm

[2, 0, 2.5] [m]
[2, 3, 3] [m]
[2, 3, 1.5] [m]
1 m/s

MCS

N

fs
BW
fc

PTx

NF
N0
Nint

PN

pAP
pIRS
pMU
v

Frameparameters

RFparameters

The parameters for the length of the preamble, data field, and training subfield
follow the IEEE 802.11ad PHY frame parameters and are quantified within
the Matlab code in [45]. The preamble field encompasses the short training,
channel estimation; and header fields. The training subfields encompass the
automatic gain control and beamforming training fields; see [43].
to (17)
We follow the ETSI
to define the noise-related values. We evaluate the noise
pp. 51]
Nint
floor as PN = 10 log(10
10 ) + 10 log(BW). Regarding
the IRS, we choose 160 × 160 elements, equivalently to a size of
160 × λ
≈ 40 cm, where c is the speed of light. We choose this
value as we observe a sufficiently high SNR in the center; see Fig. 10. An
example of fabricated solutions is 160 × 160 in the 60 GHz band [46].

in [44, Table 5, entries (13)

2 = 160 c
2fc

10 + 10

report

NF+No

We configure the IRS of 160 × 160 elements as indicated
in Section III-A. We selected the IRS dimension as follows
from the fabricated module in [46]. To ensure seamless
communication for the MU, we configure the IRS to render an
SNR larger than 30 dB within the illuminated area. There, we
observe zero bit error rate (BER) for encoded transmissions.
Following this setup, the IRS projects a nearly circular SNR
pattern on the ground since it is installed in the ceiling; see
Fig. 10. The results presented in Fig. 10 assure the largest
illuminated area for the corresponding SNR value larger than
30 dB with a wide-beam parameter of ∆x = ∆y = 1.7 m. As
depicted in Fig. 10, outside the illuminated area, the MU
experiences lower SNR values, as the beam from the AP is
steered by the IRS mainly to inside the area.

B. Evaluating the Transmission Frame Parameters

We evaluate the variables TIRS, Tloc, Tp_ovh, and Tdata using

the parameters listed in Table I as follows:
IRS reconfiguration (TIRS): We assume the IRS is equipped
with a WiFi interface, and the AP sends the pre-calculated
IRS coefficients, as introduced in Section VI-A, through this
interface. Although the coefficients can be calculated at the
IRS, we select to be evaluated at the AP in favor of reduced

Fig. 9: Block diagram for the implemented transmission-
reception scheme according to the 802.11ad.

A. Scenario Setup

We follow the IEEE 802.11ad standard as it operates in
the mmWave band [41] through the schematic in Fig. 1. The
communication link consists of a single AP-MU link through
the IRS-assisted channel; where we assume NLOS conditions
between the AP and the MU. In this communication link, we
locate the AP at 2.5 m height from the floor, and MU’s terminal
is located at 1.5 m height. The communication between the AP
and the MU occurs through the IRS located in the ceiling at a
height of 3 m, where the MU is within the near field region
of the IRS.

The AP generates a random data sequence and creates an
IEEE 802.11ad packet with the preamble and data field length,
as listed in Table I.13 We perform transmissions with the
modulation and coding scheme (MCS) 12.6, which corresponds
to a single-carrier 64-quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM),
encoded with a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code; see
[42, Table 20.19 and Sec. 20.6.3.1.4].14

As illustrated in Fig. 1, the signal travels from the AP to
the IRS, and from there, it is reflected to the ground plane
where the MU is located. We abstract the communication
link with the SNR parameters as evaluated in Eq. (1), where
λ = c
≈ 5mm corresponds to the center frequency of
fc
transmissions fc = 60.48 GHz. This transmission frequency
is the selected carrier frequency for channel two within the
802.11ad standard and is available in all regions. The receiver
decodes the information bits in the data field after various signal
processing blocks accounting for packet detection, time and
frequency synchronization, and channel and noise estimation.
See details in the block diagram representation of the link and
the receiver in Fig. 9. The transmission and noise power levels
at the receiver are selected from the ETSI report in [44] and
listed in Table I.

13For details on the IEEE 802.11ad packet structure, we refer to the
directional multi-gigabit (DMG) PHY implementation, as given within the
standard in [42, Sec. 20]. A summary of these parameters is also listed in [43].
14MCS = 12.6 enables high throughput transmissions (8 Gbit/s) and large
data packets (≈ 262 kB per frame) supporting applications like 3D high-
definition video streams. This setting affords transmissions in long-lasting
channel coherence times; which is the case in our scenario where the MU
speed is not larger than 1 m/s.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

PacketWaveformGeneratorPacketWaveformGeneratorPSDUIRS-assisted LinkReceiverPacket Detect& CoarseFrequencyCorrectionTimingSynchronization& ChannelEstimationNoiseEstimationExtract DataFieldsEqualizeDataPhase Tracking& CorrectionData BitRecoverReceiverPSDUThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

12

packets per block via the IRS. Adopting this approach and
setup, the localization time yields

Tloc =(2 transmissions) × (112 blocks) × TPPDU−loc+

(35)

+ (112 blocks) × TPPDU−IRS

≈15 ms,

where the first term accounts for the transmission of two packets
per block, and the second term for the IRS reconfiguration per
block. The parameter TPPDU−IRS is calculated similarly as in
(34) but with Dataloc = 1, which refers to the transmission of
a single byte within the data block in the frame.17 We remark
that Eq. (35) only reflects time slots for packet transmissions,
as we assume that the computation time required to run
the localization algorithm is negligible when compared to
the transmission time. The implicit assumption is that the
computational capabilities at the AP are sufficiently high.
Preamble and training time (Tp_ovh): The preamble field of
the received packet is used to compensate for the channel effects
and equalize data (frequency correction, noise estimation,
synchronization), also for beamforming (training field), and
further parameter specification like the MCS within the header
block. We calculate the overhead within the packet as

(Preamble field length + Training field length),

(36)

s

1 f

Tp_ovh =

≈ 5.3 µs.

Data time interval (Tdata): We compute this time interval
with the total of samples for the data sequence as

Tdata = Data Length/fs

(37)

≈ 260 µs,

where we assume the largest packet possible (corresponding to
around 262 kB) within this standard, and in favor of the least
packet overhead.

C. Evaluating the Average PAoI

Using the IEEE 80211.ad transmission-reception scheme, we
balance the impact of overhead (due to MU localization and
IRS reconfiguration) and packet losses (due to MU mobility)
through the following steps

Step 1. (Evaluate the radius for the illuminated area):
We compute this radius to observe a zero BER as the criteria.18
The BER is evaluated using Monte Carlo simulations of
the transmission-reception scheme depicted in Fig. 9. We
performed a total of 50 × 104 packet emissions per radius
value, which correspond to more than 100 Mbit emissions.
Fig. 11 illustrates the evaluation of the perceived SNR (mean
and variance) and BER at the receiver side as a function
of the radius.19 Based on the results in Fig. 11, we select

17During localization, we assume a single transmitted byte per packet to

afford the lowest overhead possible.

18We choose this criteria as our formulation for the average PAoI in (33)
implicitly assumes free-of-errors transmissions in the illuminated area. To
consider cases allowing higher BER, a new formulation is needed to evaluate
the PAoI to consider communication errors.

19We remark that the MU will be located in the IRS’s near field and the

SNR calculations follow the near field evaluation in [26].

Fig. 10: Heat map of the SNR values for the IRS’s illuminated
area and the parameters given in Table I, following the
framework presented in [26].

computational complexity with the IRS equipment. In this
setup, we also assume that the reconfiguration time equals
the transmission time of a WiFi packet, where the data block
within the frame is of the minimum length needed to send
the coefficients from the AP to the IRS. Assuming a double
point precision of 32 bits per coefficient, and that the IRS
comprises 160 × 160 coefficients (see Table I), the amount of
bytes needed is DataIRS =

= 102.4 kB yielding

(cid:108) 32×1602
8

(cid:109)

TIRS = TPPDU−IRS,

(34)

(Preamble field length + DataIRS

s
+ Training field length),
≈ 105.4 µs,

1 f

=

This calculation follows the physical layer protocol data unit
(PPDU) structure, according to the IEEE 802.11ad standard (see
details in [43]). The preamble, training lengths, and sampling
frequency fs are specified in Table I while DataIRS is evaluated
as already indicated above.15
Localization time (Tloc): We follow the solution reported in
[29] for localization, where an IRS is reconfigured to scan the
MU plane and look for its reflected signals in a WiFi scenario.16
The method performs once a coarse-grained measurement to
obtain the initial position of the MU and continues tracking
the user with fine-grained measurements. The fine-grained
measurement is the one we account for with the localization
time, as the coarse-grained measurement is performed only
once, yielding negligible associated overhead over time. For
the fine-grained measurement, a 1 × 1 m2 area around the MU
location is divided into 11 × 11 blocks; see [29, Sec. VI A].
The IRS is reconfigured once per block by the AP, and then
measurements are performed with the AP sending two data

15The corresponding field length is evaluated through the Matlab code

accessible in https://github.com/tkn-tub/IRS_Rejuvenation

16During the localization phase, the IRS is configured differently than for
data transmission as it renders a narrow beam instead of a wide beam (as
explained in Section III-A). We omit details on the IRS reconfiguration for
localization as this step is abstracted with the localization time variable; still,
information on this method is provided in [29, Algorithm 1].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-10 dB-5 dB0 dB5 dB10 dB15 dB-20246-505-40-30-20-10010This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

13

Fig. 11: Average SNR and BER as evaluated along the
perimeter of the circle with radius given in the horizontal
axis of this plot.

Fig. 12: Fraction of time in the inner and outer areas when
rin = 1.7 m, rout = 3 m, v = 1 m/s.

rin = 1.7 m as the maximum radius to observe BER = 0 as
per simulation.20

Step 2. (Evaluate the fraction of time the MU is inside
and outside the illuminated area): For a given Tupd, we
evaluate the fraction of time the MU is inside (π′
2) and
outside (π′
3) the illuminated area using the formulation in
(32). We remark that these fraction of times already include
the overhead introduced by the MU localization and the IRS
reconfiguration phase. We show the results of this evaluation in
Fig. 12. As can be seen, if the IRS is updated more frequently
than every ≈ 4.6 s, the MU spends more time in the illuminated
area than outside it, and the average PAoI will be mostly
evaluated as in (30).

At this point, we highlight that these two steps capture the
influence of the IRS design on the communication link. For
instance, a larger IRS effectively expands the illuminated area,
thereby shifting to the right the intersection of the curves for π′
2
and π′
3 in Fig. 12. As a result, the overall system performance
enhances due to the need to update the IRS less frequently.

Step 3. (Evaluate the average PAoI and select its min-
imum): We evaluate the average PAoI with (33) once the
radius of the illuminated area is selected (rin = 1.7 m) and
the fraction of time has been calculated, see Fig. 12. As a
result, Fig. 13 depicts the average PAoI (for various radii) and
the optimal update period Tupd.21 With the plot in Fig. 13 the
average PAoI ranges in the hundreds of microseconds, and the
optimal update period results in the order of seconds.

Contextualizing these numbers, if we select the optimal
update period in Fig. 13 when rin = 1.7m,
i.e., ev-
ery Tupd = 1.9 s (see Fig. 8 for more details),
the data
transmissions between the AP and the MU are 6275 packets

20The evaluation of the BER in Fig. 11 accounts for the selected high-
throughput MCS parameter, i.e., 12.6 as in Table I. A less order for this
parameters yields a larger radius to observe a zero BER.

21For the purpose of illustration only, we evaluate the minimum of the
different curves in Fig. 13 by selecting the smallest sample in the time sampled
range. We obtain the samples by evaluating (33) in the time range 0.5 × 10−4
to 2.5 s with sampling interval 50 µs. This is an approximate value, and a
more accurate solution can be evaluated by derivative-free (e.g., bisection) or
gradient-based (e.g., Newton’s) methods.

Fig. 13: Average PAoI with Tupd and various radius for the
illuminated area.

in a run before reconfiguring the IRS again.22 Reducing Tupd
generates a larger overhead, and increasing it yields a larger
BER. With this update time, the resulting overhead is around
Tovh
≈ 9.6 % of the update period, after using Eq. (6) to
Tupd
evaluate Tovh. This relatively small overhead is the minimum
achievable one to balance the impact of the MU mobility.

Besides, visualizing the behavior for the average PAoI for
smaller radii of the illuminated area provides some compelling
insights. As depicted in Fig. 13, the optimal selection for Tupd
shifts to the left with the decreasing radius as expected; however,
the minimum average PAoI increases but not significantly. For
reduced radii, the selection of the optimal Tupd becomes crucial,
as the average PAoI increases dramatically for small deviations
out of the optimal point; see, for instance, the case rin = 30 cm
in Fig. 13.23

D. Extending the Evaluation of the Average PAoI

Following the above steps, we can evaluate the optimal
update periodicity for different mobility model configurations.
Fig. 14 comparatively depicts the Tupd versus the radius of the

22We do this calculation with the ratio Tupd/(Tppdu + Idle Time), where

the Idle time is 20 µs; see Table I.

23The case when rin = 30 cm becomes relevant for secure wireless
communications (see [47]) where smaller coverage areas are preferred and
the selection of the IRS configuration time becomes more relevant.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

0510152000.20.40.60.8100.511.522.5280290300310320330340This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

14

case of multiple MUs,
the IRS need to be split among
the MUs, impacting the achieved SNR and the size of the
illuminated area. Another interesting research direction is
the optimization of other system parameters, such as the
number of IRS elements and the transmission policies. For
instance, finding the optimal transmission policy for the MU
is particularly relevant to avoid transmission while the MU is
outside the illuminated area, allowing it to extend its battery
lifetime. To this end, a Markov decision process (MDP) can
be formulated to determine the optimal transmission policy
that jointly maximizes the battery lifetime while minimizing
the average PAoI. Moreover, IRS splitting could be considered
for multiple MU scenarios. This would require finding the
optimal policy for jointly updating multiple segments of the
same IRS. Another relevant extension is the consideration of
more complex channel models for evaluating the average PAoI
metric. For instance, including multipath models or small-scale
fading will impact the perceived SNR, thereby impacting the
resulting average PAoI metric. Furthermore, an experimental
evaluation of the considered system would allow the validation
of the proposed theoretical framework. Measurement campaigns
can be conducted to evaluate the main metrics and correlate
their impact on information freshness.

VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We want to thank Dr. Anatolij Zubow from TU Berlin for
the valuable comments on this manuscript. This work was
supported in part by the Federal Ministry of Education and Re-
search (BMBF, Germany) within the 6G Research and Innova-
tion Cluster 6G-RIC under Grant 16KISK020K. Jamali’s work
was supported in part by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG, German Research Foundation) within the Collaborative
Research Center MAKI (SFB 1053, Project-ID 210487104) and
in part by the LOEWE initiative (Hesse, Germany) within the
emergenCITY center [LOEWE/1/12/519/03/05.001(0016)/72].

REFERENCES
[1] Q. Wu and R. Zhang, “Towards Smart and Reconfigurable Environ-
ment: Intelligent Reflecting Surface Aided Wireless Network,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 106–112, Jan. 2020.
Z. Chen, G. Chen, J. Tang, et al., “Reconfigurable-Intelligent-Surface-
Assisted B5G/6G Wireless Communications: Challenges, Solution, and
Future Opportunities,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 61, no. 1,
pp. 16–22, Jan. 2023.

[2]

[3] M. Najafi, V. Jamali, R. Schober, and H. V. Poor, “Physics-Based
Modeling and Scalable Optimization of Large Intelligent Reflecting
Surfaces,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 69, no. 4,
pp. 2673–2691, Apr. 2021.

[4] W. Wang and Z. Wei, “Joint Beam Training and Positioning for
Intelligent Reflecting Surfaces Assisted Millimeter Wave Communica-
tions,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 10,
pp. 6282–6297, Oct. 2021.

[5] V. Jamali, M. Najafi, R. Schober, and H. V. Poor, “Power Effi-
ciency, Overhead, and Complexity Tradeoff of IRS Codebook De-
sign—Quadratic Phase-Shift Profile,” IEEE Communications Letters,
vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 2048–2052, Jun. 2021.

[6] C. Hu, L. Dai, S. Han, and X. Wang, “Two-Timescale Channel
Estimation for Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface Aided Wireless
Communications,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 69,
no. 11, pp. 7736–7747, Nov. 2021.
F. Saggese, V. Croisfelt, R. Kotaba, C. Stylianopoulos, G. C. Alexan-
dropoulos, and P. Popovski, “On the Impact of Control Signaling in
RIS-Empowered Wireless Communications,” IEEE Open Journal of
the Communications Society, vol. 5, pp. 4383–4399, 2024.

[7]

Fig. 14: Optimum value of Tupd versus the inner circle radius
for various mobility models.

illuminated area and includes other mobility models such as
RWP with stop time and with random speed. For comparisons,
we also plot the case when the user moves straight from the
center to the perimeter of the illuminated area along the radius.
This represents the worst-case trajectory as the MU leaves
the illuminated area in the least time. As for the stop time,
we implemented a random variable following an exponential
distribution for various average times; see [30, Section 3.6].
As for the random speed, we consider the MU changes the
speed per waypoint randomly in the range 0.1 to 1.5 m/s and
follows a uniform distribution; see [30, Section 3.5.1]. As
Fig. 14 illustrates, the relation between the update period and
the radius of the illuminated area is almost linear. In the RWP
model, Tupd is slightly larger than the time interval the MU
takes to travel from the center to the illuminated area’s border,
i.e., Tupd ≈ rin
v . However, this is not the case for RWP with
stop time where Tupd results larger (in this case in the range
0.25 to 1 s) than the traveling time from the center to the
perimeter of the illuminated area.

VII. CONCLUSIONS
We presented a methodology to evaluate the optimal update
period for the IRS elements in mobile scenarios using an
average PAoI framework. This methodology allowed us to
develop a reconfiguration design with low overhead. This
solution plays a significant role in reducing the communication
overhead while preserving the QoS of the link. Given the
geometry and the size of the area illuminated by the IRS, where
the QoS criteria are met, our approach evaluates the proportion
of time the MU will be in the illuminated area to determine later
the optimal IRS update period. This procedure minimizes the
average PAoI and helps jointly balance the impact of overhead
and MU mobility. We illustrated the applicability of these
calculations considering the practical case of a WiFi link in
the mmWave band. We find that the update period is in the
ms range and is almost linearly increasing with the radius of
the IRS illumination area. The resulting minimum information
freshness is in the order of the hundreds of µs.

This paper unlocks several new potential research directions.
One direction is to extend the AoI framework to a multi-
link scenario, that is, with multiple MUs and IRS. In the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

0.40.60.811.21.41.600.511.522.5This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2025.3582582

IEEE TRANSACTION ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, OCTOBER 2024

15

[27] V. Jamali, G. C. Alexandropoulos, R. Schober, and H. V. Poor, “Low-
to-Zero-Overhead IRS Reconfiguration: Decoupling Illumination and
Channel Estimation,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 26, no. 4,
pp. 932–936, Apr. 2022.
F. Zafari, A. Gkelias, and K. K. Leung, “A Survey of Indoor Localization
Systems and Technologies,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2568–2599, 2019.

[28]

[29] G. Zhang, D. Zhang, Y. He, J. Chen, F. Zhou, and Y. Chen, “Multi-
Person Passive WiFi Indoor Localization With Intelligent Reflecting
Surface,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 22,
no. 10, pp. 6534–6546, Oct. 2023.

[30] C. Bettstetter, H. Hartenstein, and X. Costa-Pérez, “Stochastic Properties
of the Random Waypoint Mobility Model,” Wireless Networks, vol. 10,
no. 5, pp. 555–567, Sep. 2004.
E. Cinlar, Introduction to stochastic processes. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1975, p. 395.

[31]

[32] R. A. Howard, Dynamic probabilistic systems. Wiley, 1971, vol. II,

[33]

p. 1107.
S. Garg, A. Puliafito, M. Telek, and K. S. Trivedi, “Analysis of software
rejuvenation using Markov Regenerative Stochastic Petri Net,” in 6th
International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE
1995), Toulouse, France: IEEE, Oct. 1995.

[35]

[34] H. Choi, V. G. Kulkarni, and K. S. Trivedi, “Markov regenerative
stochastic Petri nets,” Performance Evaluation, vol. 20, no. 1-3, pp. 337–
357, May 1994.
T. Murata, “Petri nets: Properties, analysis and applications,” Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, vol. 77, no. 4, pp. 541–580, Apr. 1989.
J. L. Peterson, “Petri Nets,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 9, no. 3,
pp. 223–252, Sep. 1977.
S. Redner, A Guide to First-Passage Processes. Cambridge University
Press, 2001, p. 328.

[37]

[36]

[38] A. Papoulis, Probability, Random Variables and Stochastic Processes,

4th ed. Boston, MA: McGraw Hill, 2002, p. 852.

[39] A. Kosta, N. Pappas, and V. Angelakis, “Age of Information: A New
Concept, Metric, and Tool,” Foundations and Trends in Networking,
vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 162–259, Nov. 2017.

[41]

[40] M. Costa, M. Codreanu, and A. Ephremides, “On the Age of Information
in Status Update Systems With Packet Management,” IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1897–1910, Apr. 2016.
T. Nitsche, C. Cordeiro, A. B. Flores, E. W. Knightly, E. Perahia,
and J. Widmer, “IEEE 802.11 ad: directional 60 GHz communication
for multi-Gigabit-per-second Wi-Fi,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 132–141, 2014.
IEEE, “Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical
Layer (PHY) Specifications,” IEEE, Std 802.11-2020, Feb. 2021.
[43] WLAN PPDU Structure, https://ch.mathworks.com/help/wlan/gs/dmg-

[42]

[44]

[45]

ppdu-structure.html.
ETSI, “Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces (RIS); Communication Mod-
els, Channel Models, Channel Estimation and Evaluation Methodology,”
European Telecommunications Standards Institute, GR RIS 003 V1.1.1,
Jun. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gr/RIS/
001_099/003/01.01.01_60/gr_RIS003v010101p.pdf.
IRS-assisted link with 802.11ad, https://github.com/jorge-torresgomez/
IRS_802_11ad.

[46] H. Kamoda, S. Iwasaki, J. Tsumochi, T. Kuki, and O. Hashimoto, “60-
GHz Electronically Reconfigurable Large Reflectarray Using Single-Bit
Phase Shifters,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 2524–2531, Jul. 2011.

[47] X. Yu, D. Xu, Y. Sun, D. W. K. Ng, and R. Schober, “Robust and
Secure Wireless Communications via Intelligent Reflecting Surfaces,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 38, no. 11,
pp. 2637–2652, Nov. 2020.

[8]

[9]

P. Cai, J. Zong, X. Luo, Y. Zhou, S. Chen, and H. Qian, “Downlink
Channel Tracking for Intelligent Reflecting Surface-Aided FDD MIMO
Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 4,
pp. 3341–3353, Apr. 2021.
F. Laue, M. Garkisch, V. Jamali, and R. Schober, “Performance Tradeoff
of RIS Beam Training: Overhead vs. Achievable SNR,” in 56th Asilomar
Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA,
Oct. 2022.

[10] H. Hashida, Y. Kawamoto, and N. Kato, “Adaptive Pilot Interval
Optimization for Intelligent Reflecting Surface-Aided Communication
Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 71, no. 7,
pp. 7963–7966, Jul. 2022.

[11] N. Pappas, A. A.-E. Abd-Elmagid, B. Zhou, W. Saad, and H. S. Dhillon,
Age of Information: Foundations and Applications. Cambridge, United
Kingdom: Cambridge University Press, 2023, p. 479.

[12] W. Lyu, Y. Xiu, S. Yang, P. L. Yeoh, Y. Li, and Z. Zhang, “Weighted
Sum Age of Information Minimization in Wireless Networks with
Aerial IRS,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, pp. 1–5,
2022.

[13] M. Samir, M. Elhattab, C. Assi, S. Sharafeddine, and A. Ghrayeb,
“Optimizing Age of Information Through Aerial Reconfigurable In-
telligent Surfaces: A Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3978–3983,
Apr. 2021.

[14] X. Fan, M. Liu, Y. Chen, S. Sun, Z. Li, and X. Guo, “RIS-Assisted
UAV for Fresh Data Collection in 3D Urban Environments: A Deep
Reinforcement Learning Approach,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 632–647, Jan. 2023.

[15] W. Lyu, Y. Xiu, J. Zhao, and Z. Zhang, “Optimizing the Age of
Information in RIS-Aided SWIPT Networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 2615–2619, Feb. 2023.
[16] X. Feng, S. Fu, F. Fang, and F. R. Yu, “Optimizing Age of Information
in RIS-Assisted NOMA Networks: A Deep Reinforcement Learning
Approach,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 11, no. 10,
pp. 2100–2104, Oct. 2022.

[17] C. Wang, Z. Li, T.-X. Zheng, D. W. K. Ng, and N. Al-Dhahir, “Intelli-
gent Reflecting Surface-Aided Full-Duplex Covert Communications:
Information Freshness Optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 3246–3263, May 2023.
Z. Shi, H. Wang, Y. Fu, X. Ye, G. Yang, and S. Ma, “Outage
Performance and AoI Minimization of HARQ-IR-RIS Aided IoT
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 71, no. 3,
pp. 1740–1754, Mar. 2023.

[18]

[19] W. Jiang, B. Ai, M. Li, W. Wu, and X. Shen, “Average Age-of-
Information Minimization in Aerial IRS-Assisted Data Delivery,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 10, no. 17, pp. 15 133–15 146, Sep.
2023.

[20] C. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Zhao, D. W. K. Ng, and N. Al-Dhahir, “Age
of Information Minimization in Intelligent Reflecting Surface-Aided
Covert Communications,” in IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM 2022), 7th IEEE Workshop on 5G and Beyond Wireless
Security (WirelessSec 2022), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: IEEE, Dec. 2022.
[21] M. Ali, M. Elhattab, M. A. Arfaoui, and C. Assi, “Optimizing Age of
Information in RIS-Empowered Uplink Cooperative NOMA Networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, pp. 897–907,
2023.

[22] K. Xie, G. Cai, G. Kaddoum, and J. He, “Performance Analysis and
Resource Allocation of STAR-RIS-Aided Wireless-Powered NOMA
System,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 71, no. 10,
pp. 5740–5755, Oct. 2023.

[23] G. Zhang, Y. Lu, Y. Lin, Z. Zhong, Z. Ding, and D. Niyato, “AoI
Minimization in RIS-aided SWIPT Systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, pp. 1–6, 2023.

[24] Q. Sun, J. Niu, X. Zhou, T. Jin, and Y. Li, “AoI and Data Rate
Optimization in Aerial IRS-Assisted IoT Networks,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, pp. 1–13, 2023.

[25] M. Segata, M. Lestas, P. Casari, et al., “Enabling Cooperative Au-
tonomous Driving Through mmWave and Reconfigurable Intelligent
Surfaces,” in 18th IEEE/IFIP Conference on Wireless On demand
Network Systems and Services (WONS 2023), Madonna di Campiglio,
Italy: IEEE, Jan. 2023.

[26] G. C. Alexandropoulos, V. Jamali, R. Schober, and H. V. Poor, “Near-
Field Hierarchical Beam Management for RIS-Enabled Millimeter Wave
Multi-Antenna Systems,” in 12th Sensor Array and Multichannel Signal
Processing Workshop (SAM 2022), Trondheim, Norway: IEEE, Jun.
2022.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:14:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

