A Comparison of the V2X Communication
Systems: ITS-G5 and C-V2X

Valerian Mannoni1, Vincent Berg1, Stefania Sesia2 and Eric Perraud2
1 CEA, LETI, Minatec Campus, 17 rue des Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble, France
2 Renault Software Labs, 2600 Route des Cretes, 06560 Valbonne, France
{valerian.mannoni, vincent.berg}@cea.fr, {stefania.sesia, eric.perraud}@renault.com

Abstract—Vehicle to vehicle/infrastructure communication sys-
tems have a signiﬁcant role to play in optimizing road trafﬁc
and improving road safety. In this context, two standards have
emerged, namely ITS-G5 (IEEE 802.11p) and C-V2X (3GPP
Release 14). The objective of this article is to compare both
standards by evaluating the performance of both physical layers
and associated MAC layers. The physical layer performance of a
single link is ﬁrst evaluated and used to derive performance in a
loaded network where each user is scheduled by their respective
MAC layer. Performance evaluation shows an advantage for the
C-V2X for low levels of vehicles density while when the congestion
increases the performance gap reduces until ITS-G5 eventually
outperforms C-V2X. Finally, latency was also assessed for both
communication systems.

Index Terms—V2X communication, ITS-G5, C-V2X, Physical
Layer, MAC layer, CSMA/CA, Sensing-Based Semi-Persistent
Scheduling, Performance Evaluation

I. INTRODUCTION

and

have

band

(V2V)

emerged

unlicensed

Vehicle-to-vehicle

vehicle-to-infrastructure
referred as vehicle-to-everything
communications,
(V2I)
(V2X),
is a wireless technology aimed at enabling data
exchanges between a vehicle and its surroundings. Two main
specially
communication standards using the
vehicular
5.9GHz
allocated
in
recent years: On one hand the Dedicated Short-Range
Communications (DSRC) protocol developed in the US [1]
and the Intelligent Transportation System (ITS)-G5 protocol
developed by the European Telecommunications Standards
Institute (ETSI) [2]. These standards are based on the IEEE
802.11p access layer developed for vehicular networks.
A competing alternative has recently emerged with the
introduction of Proximity Services (ProSe) in 3GPP Long-
Term Evolution (LTE) Release 14 and evolved in Release 15,
notably the so called modes 3 and 4, based on the interface
‘PC5’ [3] without or with any involvement of the eNB
(respectively). PC5 interface have been designed to satisfy
bounded low latency requirements and accommodate a given
levels of density of vehicles for C-V2X communications
combined with the support of high speed. Although the
vehicular protocol stack (DSRC and ITS-G5) has been
deﬁned with IEEE 802.11p in mind, it can be adapted the
C-V2X access layer. Optimization of the protocol stack to
PC5 is currently under discussion in ETSI ITS working group.
In this paper, we will focus on communication mode 4 only.
While IEEE 802.11p is a rather mature technology, whose
capability has been tested in a large number of testbeds,
C-V2X is more recent (ﬁrst
trials have been performed
the end of 2017 [4]) and comparisons between the
at
technologies are not widely available. In earlier publications
[5] [6], system level results for limited scenarios have been
considered, without considering feasible conﬁgurations taking

TABLE I
IEEE 802.11P VERSUS C-V2X, PHY LAYER MAIN PARAMETERS

Sampling Frequency, Fe (Fe)
Tone Spacing, ∆f
FFT Size, NF F T
Symbol Duration, Ts
Number of data subcarriers, Nu
Cyclic Preﬁx Size, Ncp
Modulation
Forward Error Correction
Coding Rate, Rc
Transmit power

IEEE 802.11p

C-V2X

10MHz
156.25kHz
64
8µs
48
16 (1.6µs)
QPSK
CC
½
23dBm

15.36MHz
15kHz
1024
66.67 µs
12×RB
72 (4.7µs)
QPSK / 16QAM
TC
from MCS
23dBm

into account congestion control mechanisms which have been
recently deﬁned in ETSI and which does not necessarily allow
to conclude on the overall relative performance gap between
both communication systems. Moreover, the objective of this
paper is to analyze both technologies not only considering
the physical layer but also the MAC layer according to their
operating points or allowed conﬁgurations taking into account
ﬁeld tests packet size statistics. The paper is structured as
follows. After a presentation of the IEEE 802.11p and C-V2X
standards and in particular their physical
layer and MAC
layer in section II, the performance evaluation is given in
Section III starting with a focus of the physical layer (section
III-A). The results of section III-A are then used to derive
performance in a loaded network integrating a congestion
model (Section III-B). Section IV concludes the document
with a synthesis on the evaluation.

II. V2X COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

A. The IEEE 802.11p communication system

The IEEE 802.11p physical layer is an evolution of IEEE
802.11a. It uses Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing
(OFDM) combined with a convolutional code [7]. To provide
performance under rapidly varying channels, the time domain
parameters have been doubled, while the frequency domain
parameters have been halved. The typical parameters are given
in Table I. A description of the IEEE 802.11p physical layer
can be found in [7].

The MAC layer of IEEE 802.11p is based on the Outside the
Context of a Basic Service Set (OCB) operation mode, where
authentication, association, and data conﬁdentiality services
are not used [7]. This OCB operation mode is then well suited
for rapid broadcast of short messages and a high level of
mobility.

IEEE 802.11p uses the enhanced distributed channel access
(EDCA) scheme to support different
levels of quality of
service. EDCA is based on the basic Distributed Coordination
Function (DCF). DCF is based on a Carrier Sense Multiple
Access with Collision Avoidance (CSMA/CA) algorithm. The
predetermined listening period is called Arbitration Interframe
Space (AIFS) and depends on the type of message: 110µs
for Cooperative Awareness Message (CAM), 58µs for De-
centralized Event Notiﬁcation Message (DENM). The backoff
duration is set as an integer random value between 0 and 15
times 13µs [7].

B. The C-V2X communication system

The C-V2X physical

layer is based on Single Carrier
Frequency Division Multiplexing Access (SC-FDMA) and
supports 10 or 20 MHz channels. Each channel is divided
into sub-frames, Resource Blocks (RBs), and sub-channels.
The same numerology as in LTE is considered with a 1 ms
long subframe and a RB corresponding to 180 kHz (i.e. 12
sub-carriers each of 15 kHz) and 0.5 ms in time. C-V2X
deﬁnes sub-channels as a group of RB pairs in the same
sub-frame. Sub-channels are used to transmit data and control
information. The data is transmitted in Transport Blocks (TBs)
over Physical Sidelink Shared Channels (PSSCH), and the
control information (MCS, RBs, ressource reservation interval)
in Sidelink Control Information (SCI) messages over Physical
Sidelink Control Channels (PSCCH) [8] and sent within the
same sub-frame. A node that wants to transmit a TB must
also transmit
the control
its associated SCI. As for LTE,
information SCI is critical as it allows to receive and decode
the transmitted TB.

TBs can be transmitted using QPSK or 16-QAM mod-
ulations with a set of coding rates which are deﬁned by
the Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS) in [8], whereas
the SCIs are always transmitted using QPSK with MCS=1.
Unlike IEEE 802.11p, C-V2X is based on turbo coding, except
for SCI which is convolutionnaly encoded. The considered
parameters are given in Table I. Compared to IEEE 802.11,
C-V2X provides more ﬂexibility in terms of conﬁguration:
occupied bandwidth, modulation and coding scheme can be
selected at physical layer as well as set of parameters at
MAC layer. This allows to adapt transmission according to
the surrounding conditions e.g. adapting the transmission to
available resources, or to the congestion level. In our simula-
tions, we considered the conﬁgurations that are given in Table
II which stem from a set of possible conﬁguration according
to 3GPP numerology within the ranges standardized in [8],
satisfying the congestion control constraints as deﬁned in [9]
and taking into account the packet size. It should be noted
that we only used a subset of the possible conﬁgurations
i.e. the conﬁgurations with the highest number of RBs (wide
bandwidth) and the conﬁgurations with the lowest number of
RBs (narrow bandwidth).

From the MAC point of view, according to Mode 4, the
vehicle follows a channel reservation procedure based on the
use of Sensing-Based Semi-Persistent Scheduling (SB-SPS).
This protocol exploits sensing of the medium to predict the
position of the available resources as speciﬁed in [10]. A
vehicle reserves the selected sub-channel(s) for a number of
consecutive Reselection Counter (RC) packet transmissions.
RC is randomly set between [5, 15]. After each transmission,

RC is decremented by one. When it is equal to zero, new
resources have to be selected and reserved with probability
(1 − P ), with P ∈ [0, 0.8]. Without loss of generality P = 0
has been considered in our simulations.

Packets can be transmitted every 20, 50 or 100 sub-frames
and the SPS resources can be reserved with a variable interval
which is indicated in the SCI. Thanks to this approach other
vehicles can predict when resources are reserved and can select
a free resource to avoid packet collisions.

In C-V2X, the reliability of the transmission can be im-
proved by using HARQ retransmission. The 1 blind HARQ
retransmission mechanism is based on incremental redundancy
as per legacy LTE and improves range and/or reliability of
transmission.

III. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

In this section, we ﬁrst present the simulation results for
the physical layer considering a point-to-point link. Then, we
introduce the resource scheduling and evaluate performance
for loaded scenarios.

A. Physical layer performance assessment

The results in this section are mainly provided in terms
of Packet Error Rate (PER) versus SNR or range for both
IEEE 802.11p and C-V2X. Throughout the paper, we consider
the Line of Sight Winner B1 path loss model [11], while the
fast fading is based on the Extended Vehicular Model EVA
as deﬁned in [12]. Several conﬁgurations are considered in
particular for C-V2X. It should be noted that in this paper
we consider perfect channel estimation for both technologies.
This hypothesis can be considered optimistic for 802.11p in
case of highly frequency varying channels and for C-V2X in
case of high mobility. However, thanks to advances in channel
estimation algorithm design, we do not expect this hypothesis
to change the behaviour of both technologies. Moreover, we
consider perfect time and frequency synchronization.

If we consider the periodic status messages which are sent
by the V2X vehicles (CAM) ﬁeld tests show that inter packet
distance as well as messages sizes are dynamically changing.
The former is mainly dependent on the vehicle dynamics and
the triggering conditions whose frequency varies between 1Hz
and 10Hz. The latter mainly depends on whether the complete
cybersecurity certiﬁcate is included in the message with a
header from 90 Bytes to 350 Bytes when the certiﬁcate is
included. Fig. 1 shows that the CAM message size ranges from
200 to 700 Bytes. Hence, in the following, we considered a
packet size of 300 Bytes as the average size obtained from
ﬁeld tests but results are also shown for variable packet sizes.
Fig. 2 gives the IEEE 802.11p link performance for message
sizes from 200 Bytes to 800 Bytes and assuming a speed of
130 km/h. As expected, the results show a small difference
in terms of performance, i.e. a SNR between 9.8 and 10.5
dB for a target PER of 10−2 depending on the message size.
This is due to the fact that the data rate and coding rate is not
dynamically changed and a ﬁxed conﬁguration is commonly
chosen as indicated in Section II-A. When the message size is
longer, slightly better performance is observed because time
diversity may be exploited.

Fig. 3 shows the C-V2X performance and the impact of
the choice of conﬁguration, MCS and number of RBs, for
a message of 300 Bytes. As expected, parameterization that

TABLE II
C-V2X PHYSICAL LAYER CONFIGURATIONS WITH RESULTING THROUGHPUT (SIGNALING INCLUDED)

Message size in Bytes
Number of RB for the TB
MCS
throughput

200

36
18
3
6
1.6 Mb/s

18
8

300

36
27
6
4
2.4 Mb/s

48
3

400

48
18
11
4
3.2 Mb/s

500

48
27
9
5
4 Mb/s

600

48
27
11
6
4.8 Mb/s

700

48
36
9
7
5.6 Mb/s

800

48
36
10
8
6.4 Mb/s

Fig. 4 where different message sizes result in an increase
in throughput and therefore in a degradation of performance.
The performance when 1 retransmission is used for the three
different message sizes is also illustrated. We can then observe
a gain between 5.3 and 7 dB in terms of SNR thanks to the
additional coding gain. This gain comes from the combination
of redundancy (coding gain) and better time diversity of the
propagation channel. Fig. 4 shows that the SNR varies from 5
to 10.5 dB when single transmission is considered and between
−0.3 and 3.5 dB when blind retransmission is used.

Fig. 1. CAM message statistics.

Fig. 2. ITS-G5 PER as a function of the SNR for EVA channel and different
message sizes.

uses the largest number of RBs (larger bandwidth) outperforms
other conﬁgurations thanks to the possibility to exploit fre-
quency diversity and to use a lower coding rate (lower MCS)
compared to narrowband allocations.

Fig. 4. C-V2X PER as a function of the SNR in EVA channel for different
message sizes with or without a retransmission.

Performance has been synthesized in Fig. 5. The range for
a PER=10−2 as a function of the throughput with 1 or 2
transmissions and for two sets of parameterization for C-V2X:
• wide bandwidth: the maximum number of RBs for each
message size (right column of Table II for a given
message size)

• narrow bandwidth: the minimum number of RBs for each

message size (left column)

Thus, a simulation point corresponds to a message size (i.e.
a throughput) associated with a MCS. The range d is then
derived from the performance in terms of PER versus SNR
using a transmission power PT x of 23 dBm, a noise ﬁgure
N F of 6 dB, no antenna gain and the Winner B1 path loss
model (LOS) P LW B1 with the following expression

d|PT x − P LW B1(d) = ρ

with ρ the sensitivity expressed by

ρ = SN RdB + 10 log10(B) + N + N F

(1)

(2)

Fig. 3. C-V2X PER as a function of the SNR in EVA channel for a message
of 300 Bytes (2.4 Mb/s) and with different MCS

The performance with different message sizes is given in

where B is the signal bandwidth in Hz and N the power
spectral density of the thermal noise (N=-174 dBm/Hz). When
there is a retransmission the data rate has been halved because
in this case the message is transmitted over a period that is

twice as long, i.e. 2 TTIs. Performance is highly dependent
on the MCS used for each message size, especially for narrow
bandwidth conﬁgurations. The conﬁgurations using the highest
number of RBs offer the best performance with or without re-
transmission. We can also observe that for a given throughput,
retransmission provides a limited gain on the range between 0
and 40 m. However, retransmission allows much greater ranges
at lower data throughput levels. ITS-G5 performance shown
in Fig. 5 use the unique MCS (QPSK, Rc = 1/2) and takes
into account the ratio between the duration of the signalling
preamble with the duration of the message part (from 200 to
800 Bytes) for the throughput calculation.

for simplicity we consider an inter-packet distance of 100ms
(transmission rate of 10Hz).

Fig. 6 presents a performance synthesis which shows the
achieved range (PER=10−2) as a function of the congestion
level (users/km2). We can observe that the loss in terms of
range is higher for C-V2X compared to ITS-G5. However,
C-V2X has better performance (range) for the lowest user
densities mainly due to the difference in data rate (4.76Mb/s
for 802.11p and 2.4Mb for C-V2X). For the high user den-
sities (> 150 users/km2), due to a better resource scheduler,
802.11p outperforms C-V2X. It should be noted here, that
the C-V2X performance shown in Fig. 6 are based on a
conﬁguration using only one transmission, while for user
densities ≤ 150 users/km2, 2 transmissions are acceptable
according to the limitations in terms of CR vs CBR and
the available conﬁgurations (number of RBs) in this scenario.
Thus, C-V2X performance could be further improved with
the HARQ retransmission for low user density and/or by
considering the Frequency Division Multiplexing scheme.

Fig. 5. Range as a function of the throughput for C-V2X and 802.11p.

B. V2X performance with congestion

This section evaluates the stochastic performance of both
communication systems in an environment with multiple users
having to share the available spectral resource. This means
evaluating the performance of the MAC layers of both systems
in their resource selection process and observing their impact
on performance in terms of PER, range, latency and network
load. The performance of both communication systems has
been evaluated by simulating their respective MAC layers,
namely CSMA-CA for 802.11p and SB-SPS for C-V2X. The
performance of the physical layer is integrated by considering
the level of interference resulting from the scheduling gener-
ated by the MAC layer. For the simulations, we considered
a static disc-shaped network with a given number of vehicles
depending on the network load. The performance on a single
link between two vehicles located in the center of the disc-
shaped network is evaluated. Hence, for each level of user
density in the network and for each distance between two
vehicles, we draw randomly 5000 network topologies (location
of the users) that we simulated for a duration of 5 seconds.
Each user of the network is scheduled by its own MAC layer
like the two target users. Phenomena such as hidden nodes are
hence considered.

In order to compare in a fair manner both communication
systems, we consider the wider possible bandwidth conﬁg-
uration for C-V2X and the lowest MCS which respects the
Channel occupancy Ratio (CR) based on the Channel Busy
Ratio (CBR) as explained in [9]. As a result, the conﬁguration
with 48PRBs and MCS=3 is used but for a user densities
between 130 and 165 users/km2, the conﬁguration with 36RB
and MCS=4 is used and for densities between 165 and 200
users/km2, 27RB and MCS=6 is used. In the simulation,

Fig. 6. Performance synthesis of C-V2X and ITS-G5: range evolution as a
function of the network load.

V2X communication systems consider latency to be an im-
portant performance metric as some applications (such as pre-
crash sensing) require very stringent requirements. Hence, the
latency is evaluated in the following. Here, ”packet” latency
is deﬁned as the time required to correctly receive the packet
taking into account the time to access physical layer resources
and the time to correctly receive the packet. In 802.11p,
the access time to the resource depends on the CSMA-CA
parameters, i.e. AIFS (110 µs), the backoff (between 0 and 195
(15 · 13) µs) and sensing threshold according to the algorithm
described in [7], as well as the network load. Thus this access
time will increase with the user density. However, spatial reuse
is possible, i.e. users for which their sensed power is below
the sensing threshold, will be able to use the same resources.
In our simulations a sensing threshold of −85dBm is used.

In C-V2X, when a new resource is to be selected, the
SB-SPS algorithm requires to randomly choose one resource
from 20% of the candidate single-subframe resources over a
selection window which can be either 20ms or 100ms. The
resources are considered as available/unavailable depending on
a sensing threshold (RSSI based on the last 1000 subframes);
when less than 20% of the resources are available the sensing
threshold is increased by 3dB.

Because of the ﬁxed reselection window, the time to access
the resources is independent of the network load and it is equal
on average to 50.5 ms for a selection window of 100 ms and
10.5 ms for a selection window of 20 ms. This new selected
sub-channel is then reserved for a number of consecutive
Reselection Counter packet transmissions (between [5,15]).

Fig. 7 illustrates the average time required to access the
resource for both standards. For 802.11p, the average time to
access the resource depends on the network load and increases
with the user density with latency of 207 µs for low densities
to reach 10 ms only for very high user density of 3000
users/km2.

Fig. 7. Average time to access the resource as the function of the user density
for ITS-G5 and C-V2X.

The overall latency deﬁned here as the average time to
receive one packet correctly is given in Fig. 8 for a density
of 100 users/km2 for 300 Byte packets. The performance
takes into account packet error probability which is dominated
by additive noise and collisions when the range is increased.
We can then observe that 802.11p has a much lower latency
than C-V2X for lower ranges. However, the gap between both
standards tends to decrease as the range of communication
increases and C-V2X outperforms 802.11p for ranges above
305m for a selection window of 20 ms and 375m for 100 ms.
Indeed, the high value of PER induced by larger ranges has a
signiﬁcant impact on the number of packets to be transmitted
before one is correctly received.

Fig. 8. ITS-G5 and C-V2X latency as the function of the range for a density
100 users/km2.

IV. CONCLUSION
A performance comparison of ITS-G5 and C-V2X is given
in this paper. We ﬁrst derived the physical layer performance

of both communication solutions. The description of both
physical layers ﬁrst of all showed greater ﬂexibility for C-
V2X. The performance was then illustrated at the link level.
These simulations showed that for the same data rate, C-
V2X had better performance than ITS-G5. The wide variety of
parameterization of the C-V2X allows to accentuate this gain
with an improvement of the communication range, particularly
in this case,
when retransmission is considered. However,
the performance gain is at
the expense of the resources
(time/frequency) that are used. Based on the performance of
the physical layer, the behavior of both standards within a
network without cellular coverage and including several vehi-
cles has been assessed. This amounts to evaluating the MAC
layers of both systems according to the network congestion.
Simulations showed that C-V2X outperforms ITS-G5 when
the user density is inferior to 150 users/km2. However, C-V2X
performance deteriorates more severely than ITS-G5 when the
level of congestion increases. The latency, which is another
important indicator for V2X scenarios was also derived. The
resource access duration comparison gives an advantage to the
ITS-G5, however the overall latency is not clearly better for
one system because it is highly dependent on user density and
operating range.

REFERENCES

[1] K. Abboud, H. A. Omar, and W. Zhuang, “Interworking of dsrc and
cellular network technologies for v2x communications: A survey,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 9457–9470, Dec. 2016.
[2] R. F. Atallah, M. J. Khabbaz, and C. M. Assi, “Vehicular networking:
A survey on spectrum access technologies and persisting challenges,”
Elsevier Veh. Commun., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 125–149, July 2015.

[3] R. Molina-Masegosa and J. Gozalvez, “Lte-v for sidelink 5g v2x vehic-
ular communications,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 12,
no. 4, pp. 30–39, Dec. 2017.

[4] Continental,

Conducts

fully
Available:
releases/2017-12-18-cellular-v2x-116994

Field

“Cellular

Success-
[Online].
in
https://www.continental-corporation.com/en/press/press-

Continental
China.”

V2X:
Trials

[5] G. Cecchini, A. Bazzi, B. M. Masini, and A. Zanella, “Performance
comparison between IEEE 802.11p and LTE-V2V in-coverage and
out-of-coverage for cooperative awarenes,” in 2017 IEEE Vehicular
Networking Conference (VNC), Torino, Nov. 2017, pp. 2157–9865.
[6] V. Vukadinovic, K. Bakowski, P. Matsch, I. D. Garcia, H. Xu, M. Sybis,
P. Sroka, K. Wesolowski, D. Lister, and I. Thibault, “3gpp c-v2x and ieee
802.11p for vehicle-to-vehicle communications in highway platooning
scenarios,” Elsevier, Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 74, pp. 17–29, May 2018.
[7] “IEEE Standard for Information technology-Telecommunications and
information exchange between systems. Local and metropolitan area
networks-Speciﬁc requirements. Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access
Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations,
,” Tech.
Rep., LAN/MAN Standards Committee of the IEEE Computer Society.
December 2016.

[8] “3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Speciﬁcation Group
Radio Access Network; Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-
UTRA); Physical layer procedures, ,” Tech. Rep., Release 15, 3GPP TS
36.213, v 15.2.0. June 2018.

[9] “Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Congestion Control Mechanisms
for the C-V2X PC5 interface; Access layer part, ,” Tech. Rep., ETSI TS
103 574, V1.1.1, Nov. 2018.

[10] “3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Speciﬁcation Group
Radio Access Network; Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-
UTRA); Medium Access Control (MAC) protocol speciﬁcation, ,” Tech.
Rep., Release 15, 3GPP TS 36.321 V15.2.0. July 2018.

[11] P. Kyosti, J. Meinila, L. Hentila, X. Zhao, T. Jamsa, C. Schneider,
M. Narandzic, M. Milojevic, A. Hong, J. Ylitalo, V.-M. Holappa,
M. Alatossava, R. Bultitude, Y. de Jong, and T. Rautiainen, “WINNER
II Channel Models,” in D1.1.2 V1.2, IST-4-027756 WINNER II, Sept.
2007.

[12] “User Equipment (UE) Radio Transmission and Reception. 3rd Genera-
tion Partnership Project; Technical Speciﬁcation Group Radio Access
Network; Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA),
,”
Tech. Rep., 3GPP TS 36.101.

