This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

1

Coordinated Spatial Reuse Scheduling With
Machine Learning in IEEE 802.11 MAPC Networks

Maksymilian Wojnar, Wojciech Ci˛e˙zobka, Artur Tomaszewski, Piotr Chołda, Krzysztof Rusek,
Katarzyna Kosek-Szott, Jetmir Haxhibeqiri Member, IEEE, Jeroen Hoebeke, Boris Bellalta Senior Member, IEEE,
Anatolij Zubow Senior Member, IEEE, Falko Dressler Fellow, IEEE, Szymon Szott

Abstract—The densification of Wi-Fi deployments means that
fully distributed random channel access is no longer sufficient
for high and predictable performance. Therefore, the upcoming
IEEE 802.11bn amendment introduces multi-access point coor-
dination (MAPC) methods. This paper addresses a variant of
MAPC called coordinated spatial reuse (C-SR), where devices
transmit simultaneously on the same channel, with the power
adjusted to minimize interference. The C-SR scheduling problem
is selecting which devices transmit concurrently and with what
settings. We provide a theoretical upper bound model, optimized
for either throughput or fairness, which finds the best possible
transmission schedule using mixed-integer linear programming.
Then, a practical, probing-based approach is proposed which
uses multi-armed bandits (MABs), a type of reinforcement
learning, to solve the C-SR scheduling problem. We validate both
classical (flat) MAB and hierarchical MAB (H-MAB) schemes
with simulations and in a testbed. Using H-MABs for C-SR
improves aggregate throughput over legacy IEEE 802.11 (on
average by 80% in random scenarios), without reducing the
number of transmission opportunities per station. Finally, our
framework is lightweight and ready for implementation in Wi-Fi
devices.

Index Terms—IEEE 802.11, coordinated spatial reuse, rein-
forcement learning, channel access, Wi-Fi, multi-armed bandits,
upper bound model, linear programming.

I. INTRODUCTION

F OR the past 25 years, channel access in IEEE 802.11 (Wi-

Fi) has been based on fully distributed random access.
With network densification, this ‘no-coordination’ approach
no longer meets the requirements of recent applications (such
as augmented reality). The first improvement in this area was
the introduction of intra-basic service set (BSS) coordination
with orthogonal frequency-division multiple access (OFDMA)
in 802.11ax (Wi-Fi 6), where the access point (AP) coordinates
both uplink (UL) and downlink (DL) transmissions. The next
step is 802.11bn inter-BSS coordination, where neighboring
APs coordinate their transmissions for interference manage-
ment.

M. Wojnar (corresponding author), W. Ci˛e˙zobka, P. Chołda, K. Rusek, K.
Kosek-Szott, and S. Szott are with the Institute of Telecommunications, AGH
University of Kraków, Poland, e-mail: {name.surname}@agh.edu.pl.

A. Tomaszewski

is with the Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunica-
tions and Informatics, Gda´nsk University of Technology, Poland, e-mail:
artur.tomaszewski@pg.edu.pl.

J. Haxhibeqiri and J. Hoebeke are with the University of Ghent, Belgium,

e-mail: {Jetmir.Haxhibeqiri, Jeroen.Hoebeke}@UGent.be.

B. Bellalta is with the Department of Engineering, UPF Barcelona, Spain,

e-mail: boris.bellalta@upf.edu.

A. Zubow and F. Dressler are with the School of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, TU Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany, e-mail: {zubow,
dressler}@tkn.tu-berlin.de.

Station 3

AP B

Station 4

Station 1

AP A

Station 2

(a) Topology and AP-station associations.

Case I

Case II

Case III

(b) Transmission configurations that are viable.

Case IV

Case V

Case VI

(c) Transmission configurations leading to collisions.

Fig. 1. Example of the downlink scheduling problem in C-SR. For clarity,
we omit varying the transmit power. Stations are associated to nearest APs
(a). To ensure successful frame reception, APs coordinate to either transmit
simultaneously to outer stations or unilaterally to inner stations (b). Without
coordination, if both APs transmit simultaneously and one transmits a frame
to an inner station, that frame will collide (c).

Coordination among neighboring APs (called overlapping
BSS, OBSS) improves network performance in terms of higher
reliability, reduced latency, increased throughput, and lower
power consumption [1]. A good example of network settings
where such improvements can be observed are factories and
shopping malls, where the communication ranges of APs over-
lap. In particular, cell edge users, who suffer from interference
from neighboring APs, benefit from inter-BSS coordination.
Therefore, a multi-AP coordination (MAPC) feature is planned
for 2028 with the release of 802.11bn [2].

The IEEE 802.11bn Task Group lists several modes of
MAPC operation in its Specification Framework Document
[3]: coordinated spatial reuse (C-SR), coordinated beamform-
ing (C-BF), coordinated time division multiple access, and
coordinated restricted target wake time. We focus on the first
one, formally defined as “multi-AP Coordinated Spatial Reuse

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

2

(C-SR) at transmission opportunity (TXOP)-level with power
control”. This definition means that Wi-Fi devices (APs or
stations) transmit simultaneously, on the same channel, with
adjusted transmit power to avoid interference. C-SR is not
only pre-approved by the TGbn Task Group, it will also most
likely be easy to implement as there are no requirements at
the PHY layer. Theoretically, existing devices would require
only driver updates to parse dedicated frames (for over-the-
air synchronization), although the exact signaling still remains
to be specified. Note that C-SR is not the same as (regular,
uncoordinated) spatial reuse (SR), a feature introduced in
802.11ax. We explain the differences between SR and C-SR
in Section III.

Consider a C-SR example with two APs and two associated
stations per AP (Fig. 1). In this example and in the remainder
of the paper, we focus on DL transmissions (since most traffic
is DL, as per the Ericsson Mobility Report of November 2024).
The key feature in this example are the two cell-edge sta-
tions (i.e., stations 2 and 3), which are in the interference range
of both APs. If both APs are coordinated, their transmissions
can be successfully decoded at the receiving stations. There are
three transmission configurations that are viable: simultaneous
transmission to the outer stations (case I) or a unilateral
transmission (i.e., with one AP refraining from transmission)
to one of the inner stations (cases II and III). Meanwhile, if
both APs transmit simultaneously and one of the inner (cell-
edge) stations is the intended recipient, that transmission will
fail due to interference from the other AP (cases IV to VI).
Given that the clear channel assessment (CCA) mechanism
on both APs will not detect ongoing transmissions (as they
are out of sensing range of each other), without coordina-
tion, all six cases may occur indiscriminately. Even enabling
frame protection (i.e., request-to-send/clear-to-send, RTS/CTS,
frames) is not a solution because APs will still not transmit
simultaneously even if it is viable (e.g., case I in Fig. 1 cannot
be attained with RTS/CTS). Thus, the performance of IEEE
802.11 in such topologies is greatly improved with coordinated
methods such as C-SR, provided that we determine which
transmission configurations are viable.

We refer to the challenge of selecting transmission con-
figurations and transmit power settings in C-SR (i.e., distin-
guishing cases I to III from cases IV to VI in Fig. 1), as the
C-SR scheduling problem. Our first contribution is a theoretical
upper bound model of C-SR (Section IV), which finds the
best possible transmission schedule using mixed-integer linear
programming (MILP). The model can be optimized for either
fairness or throughput and serves as a baseline for comparing
practical C-SR scheduling solutions.

C-SR scheduling solutions typically resort to channel mea-
surements (Section II). These measurements can be passive,
e.g., based on the received signal strength (RSS) of overheard
frames, or active, e.g., acquiring channel state information
(CSI) from an additional channel sounding frame exchange.
Then, on the basis of these measurements, a decision is made
regarding which transmission configurations are viable. Unfor-
tunately, the aforementioned measurements can be unreliable
(RSS), create signaling overhead (both RSS and CSI), require
inter-OBSS frame exchange (CSI), and even be unusable

and not scalable for C-SR (RSS). Consider the adjoining
research area of data rate selection in Wi-Fi networks, where
multiple measurement-based methods have been proposed [4].
These methods have not been adopted due to the previously
mentioned issues with RSS, and today wireless drivers typ-
ically use probing-based approaches [5]. Inspired by such
developments, we show how to solve the C-SR scheduling
problem using a novel probing approach.

We turn to machine learning (ML) and use multi-armed
bandit (MAB) methods [6], to find which transmission con-
figurations are viable in a C-SR setting. The main benefit of
MABs is that they are reinforcement learning (RL) methods
which do not require a priori knowledge (such as channel
measurements) and can learn online, which is suitable for the
random and nomadic nature of Wi-Fi deployments. We aim to
answer the following research questions:

1) How quickly can MABs learn which C-SR transmission

configurations to use?

2) How close to optimal are the transmission configurations

found?

These research questions aim to address the applicability of
using MAB methods in Wi-Fi networks. We contribute to
answering these questions by using two types of MABs: a
classical one (flat MAB) and a hierarchical one (H-MAB),
both tailored to the C-SR scheduling problem. Then, we
evaluate both MAB C-SR frameworks with extensive simula-
tions in static and dynamic topologies and in an experimental
testbed. For comparison, we use both legacy IEEE 802.11
channel access (the distributed coordination function, DCF)
and 802.11ax SR as lower bounds, as well as the provided
upper bound model of C-SR. To encourage research in this
area, all of our contributions are available as open-source1.

We show that

the proposed probing-based approach of
MABs can be successfully applied to solving the C-SR
scheduling problem. We show that MAB-based C-SR im-
proves network performance over existing channel access
schemes (DCF, SR) achieving high throughput while preserv-
ing the minimum number of TXOPs per each station. We also
validate the proposed framework in an experimental setting,
where its adaptability to the underlying network conditions is
shown. Finally, we emphasize that MABs are lightweight and
simple to implement and, in contrast to deep RL solutions
(which require dedicated processing units), do not have any
requirements that prevent them from being implemented in
existing devices.

In summary, our key contributions are as follows:

1) An optimization model of C-SR for determining up-
per bound performance (defined as maximizing either
throughput or fairness).

2) The application of a MAB probing approach to the C-SR
scheduling problem coupled with a hierarchical design to
tackle scalability issues2.

1https://github.com/ml4wifi-devs/csr
2We first applied MABs to C-SR scheduling in [7]. Here, we extend the

hierarchical MABs with a third level (for transmission power selection).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

3

3) An extensive simulation analysis to study the perfor-
mance of the proposed approach in comparison to ex-
isting baselines.

4) An experimental testbed study to verify the operation of

the proposed approach in real-world devices.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We
review the state of the art and motivate our approach in
Section II. Then, we explain in detail how C-SR works, what
signaling requirements it has, and how it differs from SR
(Section III). Next, in Section IV, we provide a new opti-
mization model of C-SR, which determines either the upper-
bound throughput or the upper-bound fairness. Appendix A
contains a scalability analysis of this model. We introduce our
MAB C-SR framework in Section V, which we then evaluate
in simulations (Section VI) and validate with experiments
(Section VII). Finally, we discuss our findings and outline
future work in Section VIII.

II. RELATED WORK

The need to coordinate transmissions in wireless networks
with multiple base stations is a problem also known in the
cellular domain. Hence, 3GPP proposed coordinated multi-
point transmission (CoMP) in LTE Rel. 11 [8]. However,
CoMP and MAPC are significantly different: CoMP operates
on larger areas with a focus on cell edge users, using a different
PHY/MAC stack, and being limited to strictly centralized op-
eration. Therefore, we turn our focus to solutions for wireless
local area networks.

Several articles on the use of MAPC in Wi-Fi networks have
already been published, as surveyed by Verma et al. [9]. They
provide an overview of MAPC variants (e.g., C-OFDMA, C-
SR, C-BF) and comment on future MAPC research direc-
tions (e.g., multi-band MAPC, proactive MAPC sounding,
blockage-aware coordination, and MAPC scalability).

In terms of solutions to the C-SR scheduling problem,
Nunez et al. [10] estimate the expected rate of each link and
select the top results, making sure that senders and receivers
are selected only once. They later extend their approach into
a two-stage algorithm comprising compatible group formation
and AP selection (based on various fairness criteria, e.g.,
most packets to send) [11]. Meanwhile, Imputato et al. [1]
propose an alternative C-SR scheduling algorithm which relies
on collecting RSSI information and estimating if the resulting
signal to interference plus noise ratio (SINR) of coordinated
transmissions allows transmitting data with a given modu-
lation and coding scheme (MCS). Some works focus only
on the power allocation problem in C-SR. Wang and Fang
[12] address this with a federated learning double deep Q-
network (FL-DDQN) algorithm. APs use a local DDQN for
interacting with the environment and then update a global
model, considering both throughput and latency requirements.
Meanwhile, Talukder and Xie [13] adjust the transmit power
levels by defining an appropriate interference tolerance limit
using RSSI levels as input.

While most work on C-SR scheduling is simulation-based,
Haxhibeqiri et al. [14] use a real-world testbed to validate
their findings. Using RSSI reports and historical MCS data,

a central controller chooses C-SR groups for downlink trans-
missions while adjusting the MCS and transmit power values
of APs. This research is extended in [15], where frame queue
organization is additionally considered and AP coverage is
divided into circular regions to reduce the number of potential
concurrent receivers. We use the same testbed in Section VII
(but with our novel, ML-based C-SR scheduling solution).

The existing works mostly use measurements (typically of
SINR) as input for the C-SR scheduling problem. The most
common scenario in which the proposed algorithms are tested
is simplistic and assumes static topologies composed of four
APs with a low number of associated stations. Typically, state-
of-the-art works rely on heuristics and network simulations
and focus on downlink transmissions. Furthermore, although
Wilhelmi et al. [16] provide an analytic throughput model
based on Markov chains, it is limited to two OBSSs. Thus,
we conclude that ML-driven probing-based C-SR scheduling
has not yet been tested in complex scenarios, and there are no
models which estimate the upper bound C-SR performance
under any given settings.

III. C-SR OPERATION

In this section, we first present the differences between
centralized and distributed C-SR and explain why we focus on
the former. Then, we describe how transmissions are organized
in a C-SR frame exchange and show the impact of using
channel measurements. We also describe the differences with
respect to SR. Since C-SR has not yet been standardized and
TGbn is currently working on relevant signaling aspects [17],
some details of our description below may change by the final
release of the 802.11bn amendment.

A. Initialization and Centralized vs Distributed Approach

A C-SR frame exchange is initialized whenever a C-SR-
capable AP wins channel access according to legacy rules
(DCF). This AP becomes the sharing AP and participates in
the coordinated transmission in the upcoming TXOP. The other
participants in this TXOP (the shared APs) are selected in
centralized or distributed way.

In the centralized approach, coordination is done in a central
network controller, which has a wired connection to the APs.
This controller obtains and processes monitoring data from
the network, decides which transmission configurations are
viable, and selects an order of configurations which maximizes
performance (we explain the particulars in Section IV and
the required signaling in Fig. 4). This centralized approach
requires that the APs are under a single administrative domain,
which is reasonable in a typical C-SR setting (e.g., a factory,
shopping mall, or university campus).

The alternative distributed variant assumes that the sharing
AP fully controls channel access for the TXOP and invites
shared APs to transmit concurrently. To execute an informed
decision, the sharing AP must exchange data with neighboring
APs over a wired link (if the APs are under the same
administration domain) or over a wireless link (otherwise).
The former case is conceptually similar to the centralized
approach while the latter requires that the APs are within their

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

4

transmission ranges (e.g., if APs A and B in Fig. 1 cannot
receive each other’s control frames and the APs do not share a
wired connection, then distributed coordination is impossible).
In the following, we focus on centralized C-SR to provide a
proof-of-concept of our proposed MAB C-SR framework and
leave the fully distributed case, as the more demanding one,
for future work due to the lack of space.

B. Signaling Issues with Channel Measurements

C-SR scheduling can theoretically be based on RSS or
CSI channel measurements. The former requires two steps: (i)
selecting which received frames to measure and (ii) signaling
these measurements to the transmitter. Consider the example
in Fig. 1, assuming APs A and B transmit only to the inner
stations 2 and 3, respectively. RSS measurements need to be
performed at each station, but separately for both APs. This
is easy because both APs periodically transmit beacon frames.
However, the next step requires additional UL transmissions to
transfer the measurements from the stations to their respective
APs. This signaling overhead, combined with the high variance
of RSS [18], which can lead to erroneous decisions, both
reduce the applicability of such measurements in C-SR.

The CSI case, while providing more reliable measurements,
requires even more signaling overhead and additional pro-
cessing power. To obtain CSI, dedicated channel sounding
frame exchanges is required over-the-air (not only intra- but
also inter-OBSS) to determine the channel quality between
each pair of devices. While researchers investigate channel
sounding schemes dedicated to C-SR [9], we abstain from
resorting to any channel measurements (based on RSS or CSI)
and adopt a new probing approach without additional inter-
OBSS over-the-air signaling.

C. Transmission Organization

We assume a fully coordinated network (i.e., with only
C-SR transmissions). TXOPs are initialized by the sharing AP
that wins channel access according to DCF rules. Then, the
network controller instructs other APs about the possibility of
joining this coordinated TXOP and, if so, their recipient station
and transmit power settings. C-SR transmissions can start upon
reception of this message. In practice, networks will operate
in a mixed mode where not all TXOPs are coordinated, but
the goal of this paper is to focus solely on performance during
coordinated TXOPs and leave mixed scenarios as future work.
All our assumptions and design choices (DL transmissions,
central coordination, no channel measurements) simplify the
structure of a C-SR TXOP, which comprises a set of parallel
DL transmissions of IEEE 802.11 DATA frames, followed
by a set of parallel UL transmissions of IEEE 802.11 ac-
knowledgment (ACK) frames. These ACKs are simultaneously
transmitted using OFDMA as multi-user block ACKs, which
ensures that they do not collide.

D. Comparison with SR

C-SR can be confused with the SR feature of 802.11ax. In
SR, a device receiving a frame from a neighboring network can

disregard it (by applying a more permissive CCA threshold)
and consider the channel to be idle, provided that it performs
a transmission at a reduced power level to avoid interference
with the overlapping transmission. This leads to two key
operational differences: in SR only the neighboring AP reduces
its transmit power (while in C-SR any or all APs may reduce
this power) and the transmissions are asynchronous. The
outcome of this difference is that SR does not help cell-edge
users such as the inner stations in Fig. 1 and therefore is not
widely used. C-SR is expected to deliver higher performance
gains and is the focus of our study.

IV. UPPER BOUND MODEL OF C-SR

To analytically solve the C-SR scheduling problem, i.e.,
determine the upper-bound transmission schedule under the
assumption of a full-buffer traffic model (i.e., each AP always
has data to send), we develop a MILP optimization model.
This model is flexible: we show that it can maximize aggregate
network throughput (which we call T-Optimal) or fairness
(which we call F-Optimal). Since our goal is to calculate
the upper bound performance (in terms of throughput or
fairness), as stated before, we do not consider APs operating
in mixed-mode (with some TXOPs dedicated to non-C-SR
transmissions). Furthermore, as in the remainder of the paper,
we assume omnidirectional single spatial stream antennas.

Our modeling approach is derived from [19, 20]. The
authors propose therein a methodology for wireless mesh
networks which decouples the design of non-interfering AP–
station transmissions from the design of the transmission
schedule, i.e., the allocation of time periods during which
various sets of non-interfering transmissions (called trans-
mission sets) can occur. This methodology incorporates an
optimization method known as column generation [21]. We
adapt these concepts to MAPC C-SR as follows.

E

G

S

V

=

=

A

A ∩ S

of APs and

). The vertex set

). The arc set
∅

We model the network using a directed bipartite graph
,

=
represents nodes and is partitioned
of stations (

(
V
into two subsets:
A ∪ S
denotes potential transmission
and
). For each link
links between APs and stations (
, and the
e
terminating node as s(e)
, i.e., e = (a(e), s(e)). We also
introduce auxiliary sets of node-adjacent links: for each node
is the set of links
v
∈ E
originating at v, and δ−(v)
is the set of
links terminating at v.

, we denote its originating node as a(e)

: a(e) = v

E ⊆ A × S

: s(e) = v

, δ+(v)

e
≡ {

∈ A

∈ V

≡ {

∈ S

∈ E

∈ E

V

E

}

}

e

Given the complex interplay of interference at receiving
stations, our optimization process addresses two critical issues:
1) Determining transmission sets and C-SR settings: First,
select APs that can transmit simultaneously,
their re-
cipient stations, as well as transmit power levels and
MCS values to achieve successful transmissions under the
of transmission
resulting SINR. Then, return the family
T
sets t:
, where each transmission set t
t1, t2, . . .
}
{
is a vector of throughput values (rates) achieved at the
receiving stations.

=

T

2) Allocating transmission sets: Given

and the available
time slots, determine the number of slots to assign to each

T

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

5

STA 4

STA 7

STA 4

STA 7

STA 2

STA 3

AP A

STA 1

AP B

STA 8

STA 5

STA 6

STA 2

STA 3

AP B

STA 8

AP C

AP C

AP A

STA 1

STA 5

STA 6

(a) APs and their associated stations.

(b) Exemplary transmission set t1, where only AP A transmits and the crossed-
out APs are switched off (although due to lack of interference, AP C could
also transmit).

STA 4

STA 7

AP B

STA 8

AP C

STA 2

STA 3

AP A

STA 1

STA 5

STA 6

STA 2

pA,2

AP A

pB,2

pA,6

pA,7

pC,2

AP B

pB,6

STA 6

pB,7

pC,6

STA 7

pC,7

AP C

(c) Exemplary transmission set t2, where all APs are able to transmit. The
crossed-out stations could not be served due to AP B transmitting to STA 6.

(d) Possible interference that can decrease the transmission rates.

Fig. 2. Transmission sets in an exemplary topology. Dashed circles illustrate the potential signal reach for a successful transmission at a given transmit power
(the interference range may be larger). The arrows present a potential downlink connection. The vector of throughput obtainable for transmission set t is given
as [r(t, s1), r(t, s2), . . . , r(t, s8)], where r(t, si) represents the throughput obtained by station i.

transmission set (i.e., how many slots are designated for
transmission sets t1, t2, etc.).

Identifying a transmission set is generally a complex task.
While various transmission configurations are theoretically
possible, only some are feasible, primarily due to the un-
acceptable interference from transmissions between different
AP–station pairs. Since each station is associated with one
AP, we identify a link by its receiver s. Moreover, from an
optimization perspective, not all transmission sets are consid-
ered advantageous. This concept is illustrated with examples
in Fig. 2. For example, in Fig. 2b the exemplary transmission
set t1 depends on a single transmission from AP A to STA 3.
In this scenario, AP B cannot transmit to any of its stations
due to potential harmful interference with STA 3’s reception
(STA 3 is in the signal range of AP B). Additionally, although
AP C could transmit, it does not, so that there are no interfering
signals for the AP A
STA 3 transmission. Consequently,
the throughput values achieved by stations in relation to this
transmission set are represented as [0, 0, r(t1, s3), 0, 0, 0, 0, 0],
where the bitrate r(t1, s3) is determined by SINR at STA 3.
Conversely, another transmission set t2 allows three simultane-
ous transmissions (see Fig. 2c), with station downlink through-
put values [0, r(t2, s2), 0, 0, 0, r(t2, s6), r(t2, s7), 0], where
r(t2, s2), r(t2, s6) and r(t2, s7) are derived from the highest
feasible MCS achievable during simultaneous transmissions
AP A
STA 7,
respectively. However, feasible MCS values should be found
based on SINR including interference as shown in Fig. 2d,

STA 6, and AP C

STA 2, AP B

→

→

→

→

which in some cases (e.g., pC,2) may be negligible. We need
to find them in the optimization model as well, which makes
the task complex.

We break down the overall problem into two sub-problems.
The first, main problem assumes that transmission sets are
predefined (a family of transmission sets is given), focusing
on their allocation across different time slots. By reducing
the duration of time slots to short intervals, we transition
from dealing with discrete time slots to working within a
continuous time frame. This transition substantially eases the
complexity of the problem. The second, pricing problem
involves identifying only a single feasible transmission set. If
such a new set is found, it extends the family of transmission
sets to feed the main problem. The whole procedure is iterated
until no new transmission sets are found (Fig. 3). A scalability
analysis of the model is in Appendix A.

Below, we outline how each of these problems is formulated
when maximizing fair access to the network (F-Optimal), i.e.,
when we maximize the throughput achieved by the least served
station.

1) Main Problem: We operate under the assumption that
a normalized time period [0, 1] is divided into continuous
intervals. In a single interval, exactly one transmission set is
executed. For a given family of transmission sets, the objective
of the main problem is to identify the optimal mix of time
intervals that adheres to a basic fairness criterion. It aims to
maximize the achievable received throughput of the station that
,
experiences the lowest performance. For each station s

∈ S

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

6

Network data
Network topology, path loss between
all nodes, environment settings

Improvement?
reduced cost > 0

Initial transmission sets
Each AP–station pair

Yes

No

Main problem
LP model to find transmission set
shares that optimize the throughput

Output of the main model
Optimal shares, dual variables

Output of the pricing model
A new transmission
set, reduced cost

Pricing problem
MILP model to find a new
transmission set that potentially
improves the solution

Fig. 3. Relations between the main and pricing problems.

idea lies at
the heart of utilizing the mentioned column
generation technique, which facilitates the division of the
entire optimization strategy into the two sub-problems. By
adopting this method, we can discover an optimal transmission
schedule through a cyclic process of solving the main–pricing
problem pair. In each cycle, we introduce a new promising
transmission set to the family
, continuing this iterative
process until the reduced cost obtained from the solution of
the pricing problem reaches 0. The formulation of the pricing
problem, shown below, considers potential interference while
various APs transmit. Then, we are able to generate a new
transmission set.

T

∈ S

∈ A

For every AP a

be the set of available MCSs. For each mode m

, let l(a, s) denote
and station s
the loss on the transmission path from AP a to station s. Let
,
M
∈ M
let rM(m) and i(m) denote the transmission rate and the
minimum SINR required by mode m, respectively. Let P and
P denote the minimum and maximum transmit power of an
active AP, respectively. N is used to denote the noise floor.

∈ E

∈ A

∈ A

For each AP a

, we define a binary variable xa that
is 1 if and only if (iff) AP a is selected for transmission.
, a binary variable ye is 1 iff
Similarly, for each link e
link e is activated for transmission. Additionally, for every
, a non-negative continuous variable pa expresses the
a
transmit power of AP a. For all links e
and for each mode
, a binary variable uem is 1 iff transmission mode m
m
is selected for use on link e. Furthermore, for each station
, a non-negative continuous variable rs expresses the
s
downlink throughput of this station. Its optimal value r∗
s will
be the throughput for the new transmission set from solving
the pricing problem.

∈ M

∈ S

∈ E

a(e)

To properly calculate the transmit power, we need to define
the SINR condition. To illustrate the related notions, we refer
to Fig. 2d, and focus on link e representing transmission AP B
STA 6. Then, we have a(e) = AP B, pa(e) = pB,6, and
→
the set of other APs: c
. We
AP A, AP B
}
{
use only the linear relationships related to the signal power
levels as well as the SINR requirements. Therefore, we have
to use constants l(x, y) related to attenuation levels at y when
x is transmitting. Then, on the mentioned link e, the useful
signal level at station s(e), when it receives a signal from
AP a(e), is
l(B,6) . Continuing our example
related to Fig. 2d, we should also consider interference from
STA 7, since in this
STA 2 and AP C
transmissions AP A

l(a(e),s(e)) = pB,6

∈ A \ {

pa(e)

=

}

→

→

T

≤

≥

Rs, s

∈ S}

R : R
{

let Rs denote the throughput achieved by station s during the
normalized time period, which we seek to optimize through the
transmission schedule. Consequently, the problem of transmis-
sion scheduling could be formulated as max mins∈S Rs. By
0,
setting a lower limit on the obtainable throughput R
we can reformulate the latter as a maximization problem:
, effectively seeking the highest
max
possible minimum throughput that can be applied across all
stations.
Let set

denote the indices of a given family of transmis-
sion sets that have been identified so far. Initially, this family
might be composed solely of all single-link transmission sets
(Fig. 2b) that can transmit without co-channel interference.
, let the variable wt specify the proportion
For each t
of time (or the duration of a continuous interval) during
which the transmission set t is activated. Then, assuming
that for each t
, r(t, s)
represents the throughput averaged over all slots for station s
when transmission set t is activated, the cumulative throughput
Rs for station s (accounting for the contributions from the
shares of various transmission sets wt) is obtained according
to constraints (1c). Recall that the variable R denotes the
minimum throughput achievable by each station. Then, we
formulate the main problem as the following simple linear
programming (LP) model:

, and for every station s

∈ S

∈ T

∈ T

α

βs

|

|

(1a)

(1b)

(1c)

(1d)

s

s

∈ S

∈ S

r(t, s)wt

(cid:88) t

∈T

Rs =

R

≤

Rs

wt = 1

(cid:88) t

∈T

s.t.

max R

From optimization theory, we know that the throughput
value of the worst performing station can be potentially
to include a transmission set
improved by expanding the set
(cid:3) is
for which a so-called reduced cost (cid:2)
α + (cid:80)
strictly positive [22, 21]. Here, α and βs, s
, represent
the optimal values of the dual variables associated with prob-
lem (1). These values are accessible once an optimal solution
to the main problem has been achieved.

s∈S r(t, s)βs

∈ S

−

T

2) Pricing Problem: The pricing problem generates (prices
out) new variables for the restricted main LP problem, im-
proving main’s optimum (from the previous iteration). This

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

7

1. Then, M (e, m) is annulled, and the constraint is, in fact,
the linearization of the SINR condition given by (3).

If the optimal objective function value of problem (4) is
strictly positive, the optimal values r∗
,
∈ S
define a new transmission set t′, which we add to the family

s of variables rs, s

T

to resolve the restricted main problem (1) (Fig. 3).
Alternatively,

if we decide to optimize for aggregate
throughput, then we need to introduce only minor changes.
In the main problem, instead of the goal function provided
by (1a) we use max (cid:80)
s∈S Rs and constraints (1d) become
unnecessary. Additionally, in the pricing problem the goal
function given by (4a) becomes max
s∈S (1 + βs) rs.

α+(cid:80)

−

V. MABS FOR C-SR

A classical MAB agent

learns the reward distribution
of each arm by exploring individual choices. In the C-SR
scheduling problem, each arm is a given transmission con-
figuration (senders, receivers, and transmit power levels) and
the reward is the normalized aggregate network throughput.
MAB algorithms implement a trade-off between exploration
(knowledge acquisition, i.e., trying new arms) and exploitation
(knowledge application, i.e., using arms giving the highest
reward). Since a MAB agent can only make decisions a finite
number of times, it should discover the action with the highest
reward as quickly as possible. For these classical MABs, their
implementation for C-SR is quite straight forward. First, we
the sharing AP (which models
randomly uniformly select
802.11 channel access, where each AP has a fair chance
of winning the contention) and the recipient station (the
destination of the head-of-line frame in that AP’s transmission
buffer). Then, we enumerate all available choices based on
the association between APs and stations, as well as the
available transmit power levels, i.e., each configuration is an
independent action. Unfortunately, classical MABs are well
suited only for simple topologies (as we will later show) and
may fail to find a satisfactory configuration in a reasonable
time, since exploration is time-consuming for systems with
a large number of arms, as in the case of C-SR in dense
topologies (composed of many APs and stations). Therefore,
a single action should provide information about the outcomes
of similar actions to improve MAB convergence time. While in
the general case this could be difficult, we exploit the structure
of the underlying C-SR system to construct a hierarchy of
actions, which is the key design principle of H-MABs.

−

To explain this hierarchy, consider a toy example of schedul-
ing pairwise communication between n entities. An agent
selects who sends to whom and observes the reward of its
decision. The action space consists of (sender, receiver) pairs.
There are n(n
1)/2 such pairs and we call this a flat action
space, and the agent selecting such pairs – a flat agent. Here,
the action space is two-dimensional, so a single action is a
sequence of two simpler sub-actions: selecting the sender and
then the receiver. This decomposition is the key idea of H-
MABs: agents are introduced at each level in the hierarchy
where a decision is made. In our toy example, the first-level
agent selects the sender and its action space has n choices.
For each sender, we introduce another agent that selects the

(3)

i(m).

e ≥

1 ζ

pa(e)
l (a(e), s(e))

case c
∈ {
and noise is

. In general, the level of interference
AP A, AP B
}

(cid:88)

ζe =

c∈A\{a(e)}

pc
l (c, s(e))

+ N.

(2)

This equation is repeated below in the full problem formu-
lation within constraints (4i). Finally, we state that if the
following inequality formulating the SINR condition holds,
then we can use mode m in link e:

that

The formulation of the pricing problem, then, is a complex
MILP model
incorporates these variables to address
the challenge of determining the most efficient transmission
configuration under the constraints of the network’s physical
characteristics and capacities. Simultaneously,
this pricing
problem considers the dual values from the main problem, as
they suggest which transmissions are advantageous. Therefore,
this problem is formulated as follows:

∈ A

∈ S

∈ A

∈ A

∈ E

∈ S

(4a)

(4b)

(4c)

(4d)

(4e)

(4f)

(4g)

(4h)

, m

∈ M

(4i)

∈ E

∈ E

a

s

a

a

e

s

e

uem = ye

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

rM(m)uem

m∈M

rs =

m∈M

e∈δ−(s)
pa(e) + M (e, m)(1
l (a(e), s(e)) i(m)ζe
(cid:88)

ζe =

c∈A\{a(e)}

uem)

≥

−

pc
l (c, s(e))

+ N e

(cid:88)

ye

1

≤

e∈δ+(a)

βsrs

ye

(cid:88) s

∈S
(cid:88)

max

α +

−

s.t. xa =

e∈δ−(s)
pa
pa

≥

P xa
P xa

≤
(cid:88)

Constraints (4b) make the active AP transmit on exactly one
link, and constraints (4c) forbid the station to receive on more
than one link. Constraints (4d) and (4e) enforce the power of
the transmitting AP to be in the range [P , P ]. Constraints (4f)
require that exactly one MCS is used on the transmitting
link. Constraints (4g) determine the throughput of the station.
Finally, constraints (4h) are the SINR constrains that must
be satisfied if a particular MCS mode is used on the link
(and thus uem = 1). The specific form of constraints (4h)
improves the numerical properties of the problem by formu-
lating the constraint separately for each MCS. The constraint
is deactivated whenever a specific transmission mode m is
not used on link e (and thus uem = 0). In this case, M (e, m)
on the left-hand-side makes the inequality trivially true; for
all e
, M (e, m) is a constant equal to the upper
bound value of the constraint’s right-hand-side expression, i.e.,
). Note, that due to
its value when pc
}
∈ A \ {
constraints (4f) only one of uem for a transmitting link can be

∈ M

P , c

a(e)

, m

∈ E

≡

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

8

−

receiver. This agent has an action space of n
1 choices,
but there are n such agents, so no action is lost, we only
have a different representation. The key benefit of this new
representation is that both agent types have smaller action
spaces, while the reward propagates to similar actions. In
particular, every reward obtained by the downstream agent
propagates to the top agent and indirectly affects all actions
corresponding to the same sender. For example, if there is a
high reward for allowing particular entities to send, such an
agent quickly finds these entities, while the flat agent needs
to explore all possible pairs. Therefore, we design an H-MAB
algorithm for C-SR that builds on this idea.

S

P

i =

i , S2
S1
{

A
i , . . . , Sm
i }

Our H-MAB C-SR framework3 (Algorithm 1) considers the
network as a set of APs
with associated stations. This
assignment partitions the set of all stations into subsets of
associated with each AP
stations
Ai. In addition, APs can transmit data at any power lever
from the set
. The outcome of the algorithm is a C-SR
transmission configuration, comprising the AP–station pairs
∗. Following the approach
C
described above, we use three steps: selecting the transmitting
APs, selecting the recipient stations, and finally selecting the
transmit power to use. These steps form a three-level hierarchy
of agents (Fig. 4)4. An agent’s action is denoted as a sampling
operation in Algorithm 1 because the agent is probabilistic and
the action is sampled from a distribution.

∗ and the transmit power levels

P

The algorithm operates on consecutive C-SR TXOPs and
begins by randomly uniformly selecting the initial (Ak, Sl
k)
pair (lines 2-3). Selecting Ak models 802.11 channel access,
while selecting Sl
k – the head-of-line frame in that AP’s
buffer. The next decision is whether to add any parallel C-
SR transmissions to this pair.

F

The first-level agent αI (whose parameters depend on the
initially selected (Ak, Sl
k) pair) selects the subset of other
transmitting APs from all possible subsets 2A\{Ak} (line 6).
, except the initial
For all APs that transmit simultaneously
one Ak, a receiver is selected (line 9). This is the second-
level action and it depends on the previous-level action within
the constraints posed by the associations. Thus, we have
the explicit parameters of the second-level agent αII [Ai,
].
Finally, for all C-SR pairs, we select the transmit power level.
(cid:105)
This action is taken by a third-level agent αIII (cid:104)
. The
described procedure generates a transmission configuration,
which is then executed by performing parallel transmissions
∗ and results
∗ with transmit powers set to
according to
in an effective data rate r (bytes received across all parallel
transmissions during a TXOP).

Sj
i ,

F

F

P

C

Since the goal of the proposed H-MAB algorithm for

3An early version of this framework, with only two levels of agents,

appeared in [7].

4We formally define our H-MAB framework as an independent, fully
learning
cooperative multi-agent RL problem. Although the independent
framework may not be precise for some problems, such as transmit power
selection, which formally requires joint action, it is often used in practice
and yields satisfactory results [23]. Furthermore, this method significantly
decreases the number of actions (from |P|ν to ν|P|, where P is the set
of available transmit power levels and ν is the number of transmissions),
facilitating faster convergence and improving performance in real-world
applications.

Fig. 4. Example of C-SR operation with H-MABs: (1) AP 1 notifies the
controller that it is the sharing AP, (2) the controller provides the set C∗ of AP-
station pairs to transmit and the transmit power levels P ∗ of the transmitters
in the next TXOP (which include APs 3 and 4), (3) after the TXOP, all
transmitting APs inform the controller how many frames (bytes) were received
successfully.

C-SR group selection is to maximize r, we use it as the
reward and apply a MAB-dependent learning rule denoted
as an update. This update is done in reverse order to the
action selection: the third level agent is updated first, then the
second level agent, and finally the first level agent. The reward
expressed as the aggregate throughput of all transmissions
propagates through the unchanged hierarchy. This enables
the agent, especially its third level, to learn more efficiently
by introducing information on the behavior of other agents.
However, the higher the agent’s level, the more noise (due
to low-level mistakes) in the reward it observes, which is
important from the learning algorithm point of view. For this
reason, the third level should achieve faster convergence and
undertake less exploration. Conversely, the first level should
focus on increased exploration and ideally reach convergence
subsequent to the third and second levels. In addition, we
assume that MAB agents at each of the three levels are of
the same type, although each level has its own configuration
(hyperparameter set θ).

For both flat MABs and H-MABs we tested multiple MAB
algorithms (ϵ-greedy, Softmax, Upper Confidence Bound –
UCB, Thompson sampling – TS) [6], all
implemented in
Reinforced-lib [24]. We fine-tuned their hyperparameters in
random scenarios using Optuna5. From this comprehensive
analysis, we selected the best MAB types for further analysis:
Softmax for flat MABs and UCB for H-MABs.

As explained in Section III-A, we consider a centralized
C-SR approach. Fig. 4 presents the H-MAB deployment (in
case of a flat MAB deployment, only the logic in the controller
should be changed). The signaling overhead is small and
limited to data transferred over wired links. All computational
costs are moved to the controller. Importantly, H-MABs can
also be used in a fully distributed manner, with independent
agents deployed at each of the APs (one per AP). However,
this would require defining additional signaling between APs,
which would introduce overhead. Therefore, the applicability
of such a distributed solution is left for future work.

5https://optuna.readthedocs.io/en/stable/

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Controller……1stlevel agents (shared APs selection)2ndlevel agents  (shared stations selection)………LegendC*–set of AP-station pairsP* –txpower levels for AP-station pairsBACK –no of succ. transmitted framesA1–sharing AP(2) P*, C* (3) BACK(1) A1(3) BACK(3) BACKSwitchAP1AP2AP3AP4……3rdlevel agents (txpower selection for C-SR transmissions)……This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

9

– set of APs
– stations associated with Ai
– structure of APs and stations
– available tx power levels

Input:
=
i =
=
=

S

A1, A2, . . . , AN
}
{
i , . . . , Sm
i , S2
S1
i }
{
S2, . . . ,
{S1,
N
}
P1, P2, . . . , PW
}
{

A
S
S
P
θ1, θ2, θ3 – agents’ hyperparameters
Initialize:
αI
←
αII
←
αIII
←
Algorithm:

the first-level agents based on
,
A
the second-level agents based on
the third-level agents based on

with θ1
S
,
A
,
S
A

S
,
P

with θ2
with θ3

(a) Multi-room topology

(b) Open space topology

Fig. 5. Exemplary topologies: (a) multi-room and (b) open space. Crosses
denote APs, dots – stations, thick lines – walls. In (a), an AP and four stations
are all randomly placed in each of the ρ × ρ m rooms. In (b), the APs are
placed randomly, while the stations are placed randomly near their APs.

TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETER SETTINGS

Parameter

Value

Band
PHY
Channel width
Spatial streams
Guard interval
Frame aggregation
TXOP duration
Path loss model
Multipath fading
Maximum transmit power
Noise floor
OBSS_PD threshold
Wall penetration loss
Per-station traffic load
Frame size
Independent repetitions

5 GHz
IEEE 802.11ax
20 MHz
1, SISO
800 ns
Enabled
5.484 ms
TGax enterprise [25]
Additive white Gaussian noise
16 dBm
−94 dBm
−72 dBm
7 dB
Downlink, full buffer
1500 B
10

∗

C

×

75 m area without walls.
randomly within a square 75 m
Additionally, station positions are randomly selected from a
normal distribution with a mean equal to the AP’s position
and a variable standard deviation. In each open-space tested
topology there are 2–5 APs and each AP has 3–5 associated
stations. Further details on all scenarios are available in the
aforementioned repository.

The simulation parameter settings are given in Table I.
We assume, both in these simulations and in our testbed
(Section VII),
that all APs operate on the same 20 MHz
channel (channel allocation being an orthogonal problem) and
use single-stream transmissions. Wider channels and multiple
spatial streams would impact the presented results only quan-
titatively. For data rate selection, we match the MCS used with
the expected SINR at the receiver. Each result presented is the
average of 10 independent runs. The bands around the lines
and the data points denote the 95% confidence intervals of the
mean.

Furthermore, we introduce a heuristic to detect the conver-
gence of MAB agents based on Holt’s exponential smoothing
[26]. We fit the model to the mean value of all runs, then
extract the trend, normalize, and smooth. When we detect
that the trend is lower than a scenario-dependent threshold for

1: for each TXOP do
2:
3:
4:
5:

(Ak, Sl
k)
}

Randomly and uniformly select Ak
Randomly and uniformly select Sl
∗

∗

∈ A
k
k ∈ S

(cid:3)

k

sample αI (cid:2)Sl

2A\{Ak}
←
Ak
}
do
sample αII [Ai,
(Ai, Sj
i )

]

F

}

∗ do
sample αIII (cid:104)

j

(cid:105)

Sj
i ,

F

lk

∪ {

← {
C
← {}
P
F
∈
F ← F
for Ai
∈ F
Sj
i
i ∈ S
←
∗
∗
C
∪ {
← C
end for
for Ai, Sj
P j
∗

i ∈ C
∈ P ←
∗
← P

lk

lk

}

∪ {P

P
end for
Perform simultaneous transmissions according to
with transmit power levels
r
for Ai, Sj

effective data rate in the TXOP

∗.

P

∗ do

←
i ∈ C
Update agent αIII (cid:104)
= Ak then
if Ai

(cid:105)

Sj
i ,

F

with r

Update agent αII [Ai,

] with r

F

end if
end for
Update agent αI (cid:2)Sl

22:
23:
24:
25: end for

k

(cid:3) with r

Algorithm 1: H-MAB C-SR framework.

6:
7:
8:

9:

10:
11:
12:

13:

14:
15:
16:

17:
18:

19:

20:
21:

VI. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

We compare the performance of our proposed MAB C-SR

schemes (flat MAB, H-MAB) with the following baselines:

• DCF – the basic IEEE 802.11 channel access mechanism,
• SR – the OBSS Power Detect SR variant of 802.11ax,
• F-Optimal and T-Optimal – the upper bound model
(Section IV) optimized for either fairness or throughput.
We use our custom-built open source simulators, with all
design details provided online6.

We focus on two types of overlapping topologies: multi-
room and open space (Fig. 5). The multi-room topologies have
a varying floor size (from 2x2 up to 4x4 square rooms) and
varying room sizes (separated by walls). Each room contains
a single AP and four stations, all uniformly distributed. In the
open space topologies, the positions of the APs are drawn

6https://github.com/ml4wifi-devs/csr

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

0ρ2ρ3ρX[m]0ρ2ρ3ρY[m]AP1AP2AP3AP4AP5AP6AP7AP8AP90255075X[m]0255075Y[m]AP1AP2AP3AP4̸
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

10

Fig. 6. Aggregate effective data rate for two multi-room and one open space topology.

a certain number of steps (i.e., that the throughput achieved
by the MAB-driven network has stabilized), we consider this
moment as the convergence point.

A. Transient Performance

We first compare the transient performance of MABs and
H-MABs with three baselines (DCF, SR, and T-Optimal). In
Fig. 6a, when all stations are static, both our approaches
converge equally fast although H-MABs ultimately achieve
a higher effective data rate. In Fig. 6b, we introduce nomadic
mobility (all nodes change position within their rooms halfway
through the simulation), but both MAB architectures quickly
adjust to the new conditions. Additionally, in both cases, they
outperform DCF and SR and approach the T-Optimal value.
In the open space topology with a random position change
(Fig. 6c), the convergence time for H-MABs is higher than
for flat MABs, although their overall performance is similar
to each other. These results also show that MABs and H-
MABs can learn a new best C-SR scheduling configuration
without resetting their state. Again, both outperform DCF and
SR while remaining close to T-Optimal. As we show later,
the observed similar behavior of (flat) MABs and H-MABs
significantly depends on the underlying topology.

We see (both here and in later results) that SR does not
always outperform DCF. The benefits of SR appear only
when the separation between APs is large enough to enable
SR-based simultaneous transmissions. Otherwise, decreased
performance is a known effect [27].

B. Steady-State Performance in Multi-Room Topologies

Next, we focus on steady-state performance. For the multi-
room topology, we analyze varying floor configurations (dif-
ferent number of rooms, different room sizes). We present
results for ρ = 20 m (Fig. 7); results for other ρ values are
qualitatively similar and available in our online repository.
H-MABs outperform the baselines (DCF, SR) as well as
flat MABs in most of the room configurations tested. T-
Optimal achieves better rates than H-MABs since it does not
account for any minimum fairness guaranteed by our approach
(lines 2-3 of Algorithm 1), while F-Optimal achieves worse
rates because it prioritizes fairness. This is visible in Fig. 8,
which presents a cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the
stations’ effective data rates in a 2x3 multi-room configuration

Fig. 7. Performance in multi-room topologies with ρ = 20 m. Negative bars
indicate unrealistic computational requirements. Confidence intervals are not
shown, as they are too small to be visually distinguishable.

TABLE II
AVERAGE STEPS NEEDED TO CONVERGE IN MULTI-ROOM TOPOLOGIES
WITH ρ = 20 m AND THEIR CORRESPONDING CONVERGENCE TIMES FOR
SHORT (0.1 ms), MEDIUM (1 ms), AND LONG (5.484 ms) TXOP
DURATIONS. inf INDICATES THAT NO ADVANTAGEOUS CONFIGURATIONS
WHERE FOUND IN A LIMIT OF 200 000 STEPS.

Steps

Short
TXOP

Medium
TXOP

Long
TXOP

MAB
H-MAB

MAB
H-MAB

MAB
H-MAB

MAB
H-MAB

2x2

540
690

0.05 s
0.07 s

0.54 s
0.69 s

2.96 s
3.78 s

Scenario size

2x3

1320
1680

0.13 s
0.17 s

1.32 s
1.68 s

7.24 s
9.21 s

3x3

3x4

N/A
14 400

N/A
1.44 s

N/A
14.40 s

N/A
78.97 s

N/A
120 000

N/A
12.00 s

N/A
120.00 s

N/A
658.08 s

4x4

N/A
inf

N/A
inf

N/A
inf

N/A
inf

for ρ = 20 m. Importantly, in all cases shown in Fig. 7, H-
MABs outperform DCF and SR. The lower gain of C-SR
compared to DCF and SR in the 3x4 and 4x4 topologies
results from the suboptimal performance of H-MABs for such
complex scenarios. H-MABs would require more time to
converge to a better solution.

In fact,

the convergence times of MABs and H-MABs
(Fig. 7) increase with topology size and TXOP duration
(Table II). Flat MABs have too demanding computational
requirements if the number of APs exceeds six due to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0Time[s]0100200300400500600Eﬀectivedatarate[Mb/s](a)Multi-room2×2,ρ=10mMABH-MAB0123456Time[s]Stationsmovetonewpositions(b)Multi-room2×2,ρ=20m0123456Time[s]Stationsmovetonewpositions(c)OpenspaceBaselinesDCF(avg)SR(avg)T-Optimal2x22x33x33x44x40200400600800Eﬀectivedatarate[Mb/s]DCFMABF-OptimalSRH-MABT-OptimalThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

11

TABLE III
AVERAGE STEPS NEEDED BY THE CLUSTERED C-SR TO CONVERGE IN
MULTI-ROOM TOPOLOGIES WITH ρ = 20 m AND THEIR CORRESPONDING
CONVERGENCE TIMES FOR SHORT (0.1 ms), MEDIUM (1 ms), AND LONG
(5.484 ms) TXOP DURATIONS.

Steps

Short
TXOP

Medium
TXOP

Large
TXOP

MAB
H-MAB

MAB
H-MAB

MAB
H-MAB

MAB
H-MAB

Scenario size
3x4

4x4

1080
960

0.11 s
0.10 s

1.08 s
0.98 s

5.92 s
5.26 s

760
1040

0.08 s
0.10 s

0.76 s
1.04 s

4.16 s
5.70 s

below the 100% line), and (iii) H-MABs are on average better
than flat MABs. Additionally, T-Optimal and F-Optimal give
results similar to those for the multi-room topologies.

D. Clusterization for Larger Topologies

For the highly congested multi-room topologies (3x4, 4x4)
analyzed in Section VI-B for which the convergence times
(Table II) were particularly large, we implement a C-SR
clusterization scheme (shown in the left part of Fig. 10). Each
cluster is governed by a single independent MAB or H-MAB
agent, so this remains a centralized approach. Recall that in all
the cases analyzed, the APs share the same wireless channel.
Therefore, this setting shows the operation of clustered C-SR
under strenuous conditions (i.e., the contention level does not
change compared to the cases analyzed in Section VI-B).

The effective data rate values presented in Fig. 10 are
much higher for clustered C-SR, not only in comparison
to the baselines (DCF and SR) but also in comparison to
the clusterless C-SR schemes which were unable to find
a satisfactory solution in a reasonable time. Both effective
data rates improve and convergence times drastically decrease
(Table III). The changes are especially visible for the (flat)
MAB-based C-SR. Without clusterization, it was unable to
converge as a result of the extremely large action space. With
the clustered approach, it converges quickly and results in data
rates comparable to those of H-MABs.

Next, we move to more favorable, symmetrical large topolo-
gies, inspired by the IEEE 802.11ax enterprise scenario [25],
where each BSS consists of an AP with full buffers and four
associated stations, placed at a distance of 2 m (Fig. 11).
Neighboring APs are placed at a distance of ρ = 30 m
from each other. This topology is favorable for C-SR, because
it allows parallel transmissions for all APs during the same
TXOP (if proper transmission power levels are configured).

For each topology, we implement a clustered C-SR scheme
as follows. For the 3x4 and 4x4 cases, the clusterization is the
same as in the 3x4 and 4x4 multi-room topologies (Fig. 10).
Furthermore, in the 1x4 and 2x4 cases, two clusters are created
(each composed of two and four APs, respectively). Each
cluster is governed by an independent MAB/H-MAB agent.
In such a regular topology, the performance of DCF is the

Fig. 8. CDFs for the 2x3 multi-room topology with ρ = 20 m. The effective
data rate for each station is the average of 10 independent runs.

Fig. 9. Effective data rate improvement averaged over 24 random open space
topologies with a random topology change halfway through each simulation.

extremely large action space, which is at least partially solved
by the proposed H-MABs (up to 12 APs with four associated
stations each). These results clearly show that in large and
highly congested deployments, another level of C-SR opera-
tion is required, i.e., the creation of independent C-SR clusters
managed by separate MAB/H-MAB agents, as we show in
Section VI-D. This clustering procedure can reduce the size of
the action space for a particular sharing AP (e.g., the number
of considered shared APs) as well as the convergence time.
Additionally, recent 802.11bn advancements [28] suggest that
C-SR agreements can be created for long-term operation, and
then the convergence time is less critical considering the large
possible gains (e.g., the ones observed for the 2x2, 2x3, and
3x3 topologies).

C. Performance in Random Open Space Environments

We next compare different channel access methods in open
space topologies in terms of the average effective data rate
(Fig. 9). We introduce a random topology change halfway
through each simulation, where all nodes are displaced to
new positions. This sudden change forces C-SR schemes to
adapt to completely different network topologies. These results
confirm that (i) both MAB-based approaches outperform not
only DCF (on average by 80%) but also legacy SR, (ii) only
H-MABs consistently outperform DCF (there are no outliers

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

020406080100120Eﬀectivedatarate[Mb/s]0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDFDCFMABF-OptimalSRH-MABT-Optimal0100200300400ImprovementoverDCF[%]T-OptimalF-OptimalH-MABMABSRThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

12

(a) 3x4 topology

(b) 4x4 topology

Fig. 10. Performance of clustered MAB and H-MAB variants in the (a) 3x3
and (b) 4x4 multi-room topologies (for ρ = 20 m). The numbers in each
room identify the assigned cluster.

Fig. 11. Exemplary symmetrical
topology. Crosses denote APs, dots –
stations, thick lines – walls. Each BSS is composed of an AP and four stations
are symmetrically placed at a distance of 2 m.

Fig. 12. Performance in the symmetrical enterprise scenario. Confidence
intervals are not shown, as they are too small to be visually distinguishable.

worst (because of its strict CCA threshold) and is only partially
improved by SR, which relaxes this constraint (Fig. 12).
However, the performance of clustered C-SR with MAB and
H-MAB independent agents is much better in terms of the
effective data rate, which comes close to that of F-Optimal
and T-Optimal (which are similar on account of the favorable
conditions mentioned before). Importantly, the performance of
both clusterless MAB and H-MAB C-SR is worse than that
of SR, because of the significant time that they require to
converge to the optimum.

A full implementation of a clustered C-SR approach (i.e.,
with dynamic cluster creation) requires modifications in the
presented C-SR scheme (at the network controller level) and
is left for future study. However, this subsection shows the
potential of clustered C-SR operation and signalizes an open
research challenge.

E. Impact of Legacy Devices

So far, we have analyzed the performance of the proposed
C-SR scheme under no external interference (i.e., an isolated
case). Here, we measure the impact of additional legacy APs
on C-SR operation in an exemplary 2x2 multi-room topology
(Fig. 5a). We proceed to uniformly add legacy (non-C-SR) APs
so that each of these extra APs contends with exactly one of
the four C-SR APs. For example, if there are seven non-C-SR
APs, then three of the C-SR APs contend with two extra APs,
while the fourth one contends with one extra AP. As reference
levels, we use the performance of DCF and SR, both operating
in a network topology without the extra APs. Therefore, in
Fig. 13, the presented performance of DCF and SR as well as
the data point for H-MAB and zero legacy APs, corresponds
to the results of the 2x2 room in Fig. 7. We analyze the
effective data rate achieved under the condition that one
of the C-SR APs successfully wins the channel contention.
These results show that when the number of legacy APs
increases, the operation of C-SR steadily deteriorates due to an
increased probability of collisions and fewer opportunities for
successful C-SR transmissions. However, even with multiple
additional APs the performance of C-SR is better than that
of SR and DCF working in a less crowded environment. This
suggests that C-SR can bring important gains and improve

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

0ρ2ρ3ρX[m]0ρ2ρ3ρ4ρY[m]221122114433Clusteringscheme3x402004006008001000Eﬀectivedatarate[Mb/s]DCFSRMABH-MABCl.MABCl.H-MABF-OptimalT-Optimal0ρ2ρ3ρ4ρX[m]0ρ2ρ3ρ4ρY[m]2211221144334433Clusteringscheme4x402004006008001000Eﬀectivedatarate[Mb/s]DCFSRMABH-MABCl.MABCl.H-MABF-OptimalT-Optimal0ρ2ρ3ρX[m]0ρ2ρ3ρY[m]AP1AP2AP3AP4AP5AP6AP7AP8AP91x42x43x44x40500100015002000Eﬀectivedatarate[Mb/s]DCFMABCl.MABF-OptimalSRH-MABCl.H-MABT-OptimalThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

13

Fig. 13.
Impact of additional legacy APs on C-SR operation compared to
baseline DCF and SR algorithms operation in less crowded environment (i.e.,
without additional legacy APs) in the 2x2 multi-room topology with ρ =
20 m.

overall channel utilization, not only for homogeneous, but also
heterogeneous deployments.

VII. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION

To validate our simulation findings, we evaluate our pro-
posed MABs in experiments. In the following, we describe
the testbed composition and the results obtained.

A. Testbed Description

We use the Industrial IoT Lab7 from Ghent University to
perform a real-world validation of our approach. All Wi-Fi
devices use openwifi8, which is the first open-source imple-
mentation of Wi-Fi based on software defined radio (SDR).
The design includes an open-source implementation of the
physical layer, the lower and higher MAC layers, and is fully
compatible with off-the-shelf Wi-Fi nodes.

In addition to the normal Wi-Fi features and flexible pa-
rameter configuration, openwifi supports accurate time syn-
chronization with microsecond accuracy [29] as well as a
traffic scheduling mechanism that assigns dedicated time slots
to hardware queues on a periodic basis [30]. In addition,
openwifi allows selecting MCS and transmit power values
on a per-time slot basis and remotely configuring the SDR
devices using a dedicated controller. The duration of these
time slots is fully configurable. With these main enablers,
the openwifi-based testbed is suitable to perform tests of
concurrent downlink transmissions from multiple APs (C-
SR) [14] and, therefore, is an ideal candidate to test our
proposed solution in practice. We optimize MAB and H-MAB
hyperparameters in a digital-twin of the testbed recreated in
our simulation environment. Then, we install (flat) MABs
and H-MABs on the network controller, which communicates
the decisions on the transmission configurations and transmit
power settings to APs using Ethernet connections, as shown
in Fig. 4. The controller also collects information whether the
performed transmissions were successful or not, which then

7https://idlab.ugent.be/resources/industrial-iot-lab
8https://github.com/open-sdr/openwifi

Fig. 14. Schematic illustration of the testbed topology.

serves as a reward for the implemented agents. Additionally,
a dedicated switch is used to synchronize all of the APs in the
network, while the stations are synchronized over the air.

B. Experimental Setup

The network topology comprises three APs and six stations
(Fig. 14). All devices use IEEE 802.11n and operate on
the same 20 MHz channel centered at 3.686 GHz (to avoid
external interference). Each AP serves two stations: one placed
near its serving AP (1 m away) and the other in the boundary
coverage zone between all APs (6 m to 8 m away from its
AP). However, due to different station placement (i.e., different
propagation and channel conditions) their transmission success
probability varies under a given MCS (Fig. 15, left Y axis,
shows the success probability of different stations for the MCS
index set to 6) which constitutes a complex real scenario.

In this setting, concurrent C-SR transmissions are possible
by adjusting the transmit power levels of APs. Three discrete
power levels are allowed in the testbed: the default value
(17 dBm for openwifi APs), the default decreased by 6 dB and
the default decreased by 12 dB. All APs are interconnected
to a switch and further to a network controller via a wired
backbone. This controller collects rewards and determines C-
SR scheduling according to Section V.

We configure openwifi so that parallel transmissions can
start synchronously. A transmission slot
length of 307 µs
restricts the time slot duration to exactly one 1000 B frame
transmitted with MCS 6 (Table IV). We increase the CCA
threshold significantly to force nodes to perform transmissions.
We update the configuration selected by the agent every
10 frame transmissions; we call this a step. To accurately
measure the number of received frames, we implement a
traffic generation and monitoring framework, which reports
the number of sent and received frames over the wired link.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

0246810121416Numberofextra,non-C-SRAPs050100150200250300Eﬀectivedatarate[Mb/s]Referencevalues(w/oextraAPs)DCF(avg)SR(avg)H-MAB(avg)H-MABwithextraAPsAP 1AP 2AP 3STA 1STA 2STA 4STA 6STA 3STA 5ControllerSwitchShorter rangeLonger rangeOperational wired connection Control wired connectionLegendThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

14

TABLE IV
TESTBED PARAMETER SETTINGS

Parameter

Value

Band
PHY
Channel width
Spatial streams
MCS index
Tx power attenuation levels
Frame size
CCA threshold
Transmission slot length
Packets per slot
Slots per configuration
Number of repetitions

3.7 GHz
IEEE 802.11n
20 MHz
1, SISO
6
{0, −6, −12} dB
1000 B
−52 dBm
307 µs
1
10
10

Fig. 17. Actions taken by H-MAB in the last 200 steps of the experiments.
The X axis displays the set of stations selected for parallel transmissions.
Only actions with a frequency above 0.5% are shown.

taken involve three parallel transmissions. As expected, C-SR
configurations including station 2 are less frequent because
they result in lower throughput. To explain this, we examine
the underlying success probability of transmissions to each
station (Fig. 15, left Y axis), where station 2 has noticeably
worse radio conditions. As shown in Fig. 15 (right Y axis),
station 2 preserves its TXOPs as compared to DCF. This
behavior confirms that H-MABs not only configure parallel
transmissions but also adjust to the observed environmental
conditions. Furthermore, this confirms that fairness among
stations is not a straightforward goal for C-SR, as some
stations may be unable to benefit from C-SR (but should
be granted no fewer TXOPs than under DCF, which we do
achieve with the proposed framework).

VIII. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Our first contribution is the theoretical upper bound model
of C-SR. We show that
it can be optimized for fairness
or throughput and provide an additional scalability analysis
(Appendix A). We expect new C-SR scheduling solutions
to emerge as work on IEEE 802.11bn progresses, and our
model provides the research community with an upper bound
baseline. As future work in this area, we plan to address
other optimization goals (such as proportional fairness or
assigning each station a fair number of transmission opportu-
nities, ideally no less than under DCF) and add lexicographic
optimization. With these updates, the model should provide
more realistic (less extreme) results than those presented here.
Our second contribution, inspired by the probing-based al-
gorithms for data rate selection algorithms in Wi-Fi networks,
is the application of MABs (both flat and hierarchical) for
solving the C-SR scheduling problem. Our results show that
MABs are a highly promising learning mechanism. In addition
to good performance (high throughput, low convergence time
for small and medium-sized networks) and resilience to abrupt
topology changes, an important advantage is their simplicity,
which makes the solution easy to deploy in hardware. For
large-scale networks, we evaluate clustered MABs, which also
demonstrate strong performance and rapid convergence. Fur-
thermore, we assess the impact of legacy APs on the operation
of our proposal and find that H-MABs are reasonably resilient.

Fig. 15. Testbed results: success probability under single concurrent trans-
missions and number of TXOPs given by H-MABs to each station normalized
to a perfect round robin scheme (i.e., the long term performance of DCF).

Fig. 16. Comparison of MAB and H-MAB C-SR operation in the testbed:
average number of concurrent transmissions.

C. Results

Our results show that, in this C-SR setting, both flat MABs
and H-MABs quickly find appropriate AP-station pairs and
transmit power settings that enable three concurrent trans-
missions (Fig. 16). Since the tested topology is relatively
small, flat MABs slightly outperform H-MABs. Nonetheless,
the results validate that the proposed C-SR approach based on
MABs is feasible and works well in a real environment.

We also show actions taken by H-MABs gathered from the
last 200 steps of all runs (Fig. 17). More than 80% of actions

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

STA1STA2STA3STA4STA5STA6020406080100Successprobability[%]012345NormalizedTXOPsSuccessprobabilityNormalizedTXOPsRound-robinTXOPs0100200300400500Steps0123ConcurrenttransmissionsMABH-MAB(1,4,5)(1,3,5)(1,3,6)(1,4,6)(2,3,5)(2,4,5)(2,3,6)(4,5)(4,6)(1,6)(2,4,6)(1,3)(1,5)(3,6)05101520Actionfrequency[%]This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

15

A classical MAB is defined for a constant number of arms
(choices), and this is in contrast to the dynamic behavior of
users who join and leave the network. Although this may
seem a blocking characteristic, we argue that this limitation
is tied only to the initial implementation presented. Consider
a highly realistic scenario where APs operate with non-full
buffers while stations arrive and depart freely. In these cases,
it is reasonable to preallocate agents up to some maximal
number of APs and stations, respectively. Some of the preal-
located agents or arms are not used and are called coldspares.
When new stations arrive, we can allocate their adequate
coldspares. When APs have empty buffers, we can move them
to coldspares. The update operation remains unchanged, as
we update only the agents that are in use. We modify the
sampling to ensure that the coldspare is never selected. For
this, we propose rejection sampling that repeats the sample
operation when the coldspare is selected. This procedure
fishes for probabilistic agents, and we have an undergoing
effort to implement this dynamic based on a proof-of-concept
implementation that can be found in Reinforced-lib [24].

Furthermore, we foresee the following other future research
items. Although the presented MABs use aggregate network
throughput as a reward, other optimization goals (e.g., latency
or fairness) can be considered. To simplify the presentation,
we have idealized the MCS selection, but it can and should
be jointly optimized along with the transmission pairs and
transmit power. Our H-MAB framework can operate in a
distributed manner (having independent agents on different
APs and synchronizing updates), but this would complicate
the signaling and introduce additional overhead, so we do
not describe it in this work. However, a distributed learning
scheme with independent agents (i.e., assuming little or no
communication) would be interesting to study (especially
to see if convergence can be achieved). Finally, large-scale
scenarios with increased mobility, external interference and
other dynamics, as well as uplink traffic should be considered
in the future.

APPENDIX A
SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF THE OPTIMIZATION MODEL

The practical applicability of the proposed optimization
model (Section IV) hinges on its ability to efficiently handle
real-world network scenarios, which often involve a larger
number of APs and stations. Therefore, it is crucial to as-
sess the scalability of the model, i.e., how its computational
requirements grow as the network size increases. This analysis
will provide valuable insights into the model’s feasibility for
deployment in real-world sized Wi-Fi networks.

The performance and scalability of the optimization model
are significantly influenced by the underlying solver used to
find the optimal solution. In this study, we compare two
solvers: COIN-OR branch and cut (CBC) [31] and IBM
ILOG CPLEX Optimization Studio (CPLEX) [32]. CBC is
an open-source MILP solver readily available in the PuLP
library in Python. Its accessibility and ease of integration
make it a popular choice for prototyping and experimentation.
However, being a general-purpose solver, it is not optimized

Fig. 18. Scalability of the optimization solution depending on the solver used.

for the specific structure of our C-SR scheduling problem.
CPLEX is a commercial solver widely recognized for its
high performance and advanced algorithms tailored for solving
large-scale linear and MILP problems. While it requires a
separate license, its computational efficiency and scalability
make it a strong candidate for handling complex optimization
tasks, such as C-SR scheduling.

We assess the scalability of the T-Optimal model in the
multi-room topology. We vary the number of APs within this
grid to simulate networks of increasing size. The execution
time of both solvers (CBC and CPLEX) is measured for each
network size 10 times, providing a direct comparison of their
scalability.

Fig. 18 presents the execution time of both solvers on
a logarithmic scale as a function of the number of APs
in the network. The Theil-Sen regression lines [33], chosen
for their robustness to outliers, are fitted for both solvers
in log space to determine the quantitative measure of the
scalability of each solver. The results clearly indicate that
the execution time for both solvers increases exponentially
with network size, as expected. The regression lines capture
this exponential relationship, with their slopes representing the
exponents (β) of the time complexity. CPLEX demonstrates
superior scalability (β = 1.67) compared to CBC (β = 1.80),
which implies that CPLEX’s execution time grows at a slower
rate as the network size increases, making it computationally
more efficient, especially for larger networks.

While CPLEX generally exhibits lower execution times,
it also shows greater variation, with some outliers having
execution times comparable to those of the CBC solver. This
suggests that CPLEX’s performance may be more sensitive to
specific problem instances or network configurations, whereas
CBC’s performance tends to be more consistent, albeit slower
overall.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was funded by the National Science Cen-
tre, Poland (2020/39/I/ST7/01457) and by the German Re-
search Foundation (DFG DR 639/28-1). This research was

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

0246810121416Numberofaccesspoints10−1100101102103104Executiontime[s]CBC:α=1.85,β=1.80CPLEX:α=0.03,β=1.67Theil-SenregressionThis article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

16

also partially funded by the Flemish FWO SBO S003921N
VERI-END.com project. Additionally,
the work of Boris
Bellalta was supported by Wi-XR PID2021123995NB-I00
(MCIU/AEI/FEDER,UE), and the ICREA Academia program.
We gratefully acknowledge the computing infrastructure pro-
vided with support from the National Research Institute, grant
number POIR.04.02.00-00-D008/20-01 on “National Labora-
tory for Advanced 5G Research” (PL-5G) as part of Measure
4.2 Development of modern research infrastructure of the
science sector 2014-2020 financed by the European Regional
Development Fund.

REFERENCES
[1] P. Imputato et al., “Beyond Wi-Fi 7: Spatial reuse through multi-AP

coordination,” Computer Networks, vol. 239, p. 110 160, 2024.

[2] L. G. Giordano et al., “What Will Wi-Fi 8 Be? A Primer on IEEE
802.11bn Ultra High Reliability,” preprint arXiv:2303.10442, 2023.
[3] R. J. Yu, Specification Framework for TGbn, Accessed on Oct 10, 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://mentor.ieee.org/802.11/dcn/24/11-24-0209-
05-00bn-specification-framework-for-tgbn.docx.

[4] W. Yin et al., “MAC-layer rate control for 802.11 networks: A survey,”

Wireless Networks, vol. 26, pp. 3793–3830, 2020.

[5] R. Grünblatt, I. Guérin-Lassous, and O. Simonin, “Simulation and
performance evaluation of the Intel rate adaptation algorithm,” in Proc.
of ACM MSWiM, 2019, pp. 27–34.

[6] A. Slivkins et al., “Introduction to multi-armed bandits,” Foundations
and Trends® in Machine Learning, vol. 12, no. 1-2, pp. 1–286, 2019.
[7] M. Wojnar et al., “IEEE 802.11bn Multi-AP Coordinated Spatial Reuse
with Hierarchical Multi-Armed Bandits,” IEEE Communications Letters,
vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 428–432, 2025.

[8] J. Lee et al., “Coordinated multipoint transmission and reception in
LTE-advanced systems,” IEEE Comm. Mag., vol. 50, no. 11, 2012.
[9] S. Verma et al., “A Survey on Multi-AP Coordination Approaches
Over Emerging WLANs: Future Directions and Open Challenges,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 858–889, 2024.
[10] D. Nunez et al., “TXOP sharing with coordinated spatial reuse in multi-
AP cooperative IEEE 802.11be WLANs,” in Proc. of IEEE CCNC,
2022.

[11] D. Nunez, M. Smith, and B. Bellalta, “Multi-AP Coordinated Spa-
tial Reuse for Wi-Fi 8: Group Creation and Scheduling,” preprint
arXiv:2305.04846, 2023.

[12] J. Wang and X. Fang, “Research on Next-Generation Wi-Fi Spatial
Reuse Power Control Based on Federated Reinforcement Learning,” in
2024 IEEE VTC2024-Spring, IEEE, 2024.

[13] M. Talukder and J. Xie, “Enhanced Coordinated Spatial Reuse: Bidi-
rectional Multiple AP Coordination for IEEE 802.11be,” in IEEE ICC
2023, IEEE, 2023, pp. 660–665.

[14] J. Haxhibeqiri et al., “Coordinated Spatial Reuse for WiFi Networks:
A Centralized Approach,” in 2024 IEEE 20th International Conference
on Factory Communication Systems (WFCS), 2024.

[15] J. Haxhibeqiri et al., “Coordinated SR and Restricted TWT for Time
Sensitive Applications in WiFi 7 Networks,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 118–124, 2024.

[16] F. Wilhelmi et al., “Throughput Analysis of IEEE 802.11bn Coordinated

Spatial Reuse,” preprint arXiv:2309.09169, 2023.

[17] K. Lu et al., Multi-AP Coordination Setup Scheme, doc.: IEEE 802.11-

24/1217r02, Aug. 2024.

[18] W. Ciezobka et al., “Using ranging for collision-immune IEEE 802.11
learning,” Computer Communications,

rate selection with statistical
vol. 225, pp. 10–26, 2024.

[19] A. Capone, G. Carello, I. Filippini, S. Gualandi, and F. Malucelli, “Rout-
ing, scheduling and channel assignment in wireless mesh networks:
Optimization models and algorithms,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 8, no. 6,
pp. 545–563, 2010.

[20] M. Pióro et al., “On max–min fair flow optimization in wireless mesh

networks,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 13, pp. 134–152, 2014.

[21] R. Spliet, “A simple perspective on simultaneous column and row

generation,” Operations Research Forum, vol. 5, no. 69, Aug. 2024.

[22] J. Desrosiers and M. E. Lübbecke, “A primer in column generation,” in
Column Generation, G. Desaulniers, J. Desrosiers, and M. M. Solomon,
Eds. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2005, pp. 1–32.

[23] G. Papoudakis, F. Christianos, L. Schäfer, and S. V. Albrecht, “Bench-
marking multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithms in cooper-
ative tasks,” in NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks, 2020.

[24] M. Wojnar et al., “Reinforced-lib: Rapid prototyping of reinforcement

learning solutions,” SoftwareX, vol. 26, 2024.

[25] S. Merlin et al., TGax Simulation Scenarios, doc.: IEEE 802.11-

14/0980r16, Nov. 2015.

[26] C. C. Holt, “Forecasting seasonals and trends by exponentially weighted
moving averages,” International Journal of Forecasting, vol. 20, no. 1,
pp. 5–10, 2004.

[27] M. Natkaniec and N. Bieryt, “An Analysis of the Mixed IEEE 802.11ax
Wireless Networks in the 5 GHz Band,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 10, 2023.
[28] J. C. et al., Details on the unified MAPC framework, Accessed on April
2, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://mentor.ieee.org/802.11/dcn/25/11-
25-0502-00-00bn-details-on-the-unified-mapc-framework.pptx.
[29] X. Jiao, W. Liu, M. Mehari, M. Aslam, and I. Moerman, “openwifi:
a free and open-source IEEE802.11 SDR implementation on SoC,” in
2020 IEEE 91st Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2020-Spring),
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–2.

[30] J. Haxhibeqiri et al., “Bringing time-sensitive networking to wireless
professional private networks: Filling gaps and bridging the innovation,”
Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 121, pp. 1255–1271, 2021.

[31] J. Forrest et al., Coin-or/cbc: Release releases/2.10.12, version re-

[32]

leases/2.10.12, Aug. 2024.
IBM, IBM ILOG CPLEX Optimization Studio CPLEX user’s manual,
2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/icos/20.1.0?
topic=cplex-users-manual.

[33] X. Dang, H. Peng, X. Wang, and H. Zhang, “Theil-sen estimators in a

multiple linear regression model,” Olemiss Edu, vol. 2, 2008.

Maksymilian Wojnar is a PhD candidate and re-
searcher in machine learning and wireless networks,
with an MSc degree in computer science from the
AGH University of Krakow (2024). His research
focuses primarily on optimizing wireless networks
through machine learning techniques, particularly
reinforcement learning. He is actively involved in
collaborative research projects within these areas.
Additionally, his work extends to the broader ap-
plication of machine learning, with contributions in
generative neural networks.

Wojciech Ci˛e˙zobka received his MSc degree (with
honors) in Data Science from the AGH University of
Krakow in 2024, where his research focused on ap-
plying reinforcement learning to optimize future Wi-
Fi networks. The work presented in this article stems
from his time as a Machine Learning Researcher at
AGH. He now applies his expertise in machine learn-
ing and optimization in the logistics industry, where
he coordinates the development and deployment of
a new generation of freight forwarding software.

Artur Tomaszewski received the MSc and PhD
degrees in telecommunications, in 1990 and 1993,
respectively, and in 2014 received the DSc degree
(habilitation) in technical sciences, all from the
Warsaw University of Technology (WUT). He was
the head of the Computer Networks and Services
Division at WUT. Currently, he is a professor at the
Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunications and In-
formatics, Gda´nsk University of Technology (GUT).
His research areas are communications networks
architecture, network control and management, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

network design and optimization.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

17

Piotr Chołda is an associate professor at
the
Institute of Telecommunications, AGH University
of Krakow, Poland. He earned his habilitation in
Telecommunications from AGH University in 2016.
His research interests include the management of
communication networks and computer systems,
with a particular focus on risk-aware performance
evaluation and design, resource optimization, and
control using machine learning methods, as well
as novel approaches in cryptology. Dr. Chołda has
participated in several European research projects,
including NOBEL, Euro-NF, SmoothIT, STAR, RECODIS, and PQ-REACT.

Jeroen Hoebeke received the master’s degree in
engineering computer science from Ghent Univer-
sity, in 2002, and the PhD degree in engineering
computer science,
in 2007, with his research on
adaptive ad hoc routing and virtual private ad hoc
networks. He is currently an Associate Professor
with the Internet Technology and Data Science
Laboratory, Ghent University and imec. He is the
author or co-author of more than 200 publications in
international journals or conference proceedings. He
is conducting and coordinating research on wireless
(IoT) connectivity, embedded communication stacks, deterministic wireless
communication, and wireless network management.

Krzysztof Rusek is an assistant professor at AGH
University and a data scientist at
the Barcelona
Neural Networking Center. He defended his PhD
thesis on queuing theory in 2016 at AGH. His
main research interests are performance evaluation
of telecommunications systems, machine learning
and data mining. Currently, he is working on the ap-
plication of graph neural networks and probabilistic
modeling for performance evaluation of communi-
cations systems.

Boris Bellalta (IEEE Senior Member) is a full pro-
fessor at Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), where he
leads the Wireless Networking group. His research
interests lie in the area of wireless networks and
performance evaluation, with a particular emphasis
on Wi-Fi technologies and machine learning-based
adaptive systems. He has supervised more than 15
PhD students. In 2024, he was awarded the ICREA
Academia fellowship by the Catalan Government.

Katarzyna Kosek-Szott received her MSc and PhD
degrees in telecommunications (both with honors)
from the AGH University of Krakow, Poland in 2006
and 2011, respectively. In 2016 she received her
habilitation degree and in 2023 – a full professor
title. Currently she is working as a full professor at
the Institute of Telecommunications, AGH Univer-
sity of Krakow. Her general research interests are
focused on wireless networking. The major topics
include wireless LANs, quality of service provision-
ing, novel amendments to the IEEE 802.11 standard,
performance improvement with machine learning, and coexistence of different
radio technologies in unlicensed bands. She is a reviewer for international
journals and conferences. She has been involved in several European projects:
DAIDALOS II, CONTENT, CARMEN, FLAVIA, PROACTIVE, RESCUE
as well as grants supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher
Education and the National Science Centre. In 2015-2020, she served as a
member of the editorial board of the Ad Hoc Networks journal published
by Elsevier. In 2018, she served as an European Research Council Advanced
Grant Panel member for the Systems and Communication Engineering area.
In 2020, she served as an European Research Council Consolidator Grant
Panel member for the Systems and Communication Engineering area.

Jetmir Haxhibeqiri (IEEE member) received the
Masters degree in Engineering (information technol-
ogy and computer engineering) from RWTH Aachen
University, Germany (2013). In 2019, he obtained a
PhD in Engineering Computer Science from Ghent
University with his research on flexible and scal-
able wireless communication solutions for industrial
warehouses and logistics applications. Currently, he
is a senior researcher in the Internet Technology and
Data Science Lab (IDLab) of Ghent University and
imec. His current research interests include wireless
communications technologies (IEEE 802.11, IEEE 802.15.4e, LoRa) and
their application, IoT, wireless time sensitive networking, in-band network
monitoring and wireless network management.

Anatolij Zubow (IEEE Senior Member) received
the MSc and PhD degrees from the Department of
Computer Science, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin,
in 2004 and 2009, respectively. He is a senior re-
searcher at the department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science of Technische Universität
Berlin. His research interest is on emerging wireless
network architectures. Recently he focuses mainly
on coexistence of heterogeneous wireless technolo-
gies in unlicensed spectrum and high-performance
WiFi networks. He has strong interest in prototyping,
experimental work and testbeds. In the past, Dr. Zubow had multiple research
visits undertaken at the NEC Network Laboratories in Heidelberg, where he
was working on future mobile networks.

Falko Dressler (IEEE Fellow) is full professor
and Chair for Telecommunication Networks at the
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sci-
ence, TU Berlin. He received his MSc and PhD
degrees from the Dept. of Computer Science, Uni-
versity of Erlangen in 1998 and 2003, respectively.
Dr. Dressler has been associate editor-in-chief for
IEEE Trans. on Network Science and Engineering,
IEEE Trans. on Mobile Computing and Elsevier
Computer Communications as well as an editor for
journals such as IEEE/ACM Trans. on Networking,
Elsevier Ad Hoc Networks, and Elsevier Nano Communication Networks.
He has been chairing conferences such as IEEE INFOCOM, ACM MobiSys,
ACM MobiHoc, IEEE VNC, IEEE GLOBECOM. He authored the textbooks
Self-Organization in Sensor and Actor Networks published by Wiley & Sons
and Vehicular Networking published by Cambridge University Press. He has
been an IEEE Distinguished Lecturer as well as an ACM Distinguished
Speaker. Dr. Dressler is an IEEE Fellow, an ACM Fellow, and an AAIA
Fellow. He is a member of the German National Academy of Science
and Engineering (acatech). He has been serving on the IEEE COMSOC
Conference Council and the ACM SIGMOBILE Executive Committee. His
research objectives include next generation wireless communication systems
in combination with distributed machine learning and edge computing for
improved resiliency. Application domains include the internet of things, cyber-
physical systems, and the internet of bio-nano-things.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 

content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3584555

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS

18

Szymon Szott received his MSc and PhD degrees
in telecommunications (both with honors) from the
AGH University of Krakow, Poland in 2006 and
2011, respectively. In 2025, he became a full profes-
sor at the Institute of Telecommunications of AGH
University. In 2013, he was a visiting researcher
at the University of Palermo (Italy) and at Stan-
ford University (USA). His professional
interests
are related to wireless local area networks (channel
access, quality of service, security, inter-technology
coexistence). He is a member of the IEEE 802.11
Working Group. In the past, he has been a member of ETSI’s Network
Technology Working Group Evolution of Management towards Autonomic
Future Internet (AFI), a senior member of IEEE, and on the management
board of the Association of Top 500 Innovators. He has been involved in sev-
eral European projects (DAIDALOS II, CONTENT, CARMEN, MEDUSA,
FLAVIA, PROACTIVE, RESCUE, MLDR) as well as grants supported by the
Ministry of Science and Higher Education and the National Science Centre.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Chang'an University. Downloaded on July 14,2025 at 10:11:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

© 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,

but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

